Article 161
Operators' obligations concerning animal health certification for movements of germinal products of kept animals of the bovine, ovine, caprine, porcine and equine species and germinal products of poultry and delegated acts
1.   Operators shall only move germinal products of kept animals of the bovine, ovine, caprine, porcine and equine species and germinal products of poultry to another Member State where such products are accompanied by an animal health certificate issued by the competent authority of the Member State of origin in accordance with paragraph 3;
2.   In cases where germinal products of kept animals are allowed to leave a restricted zone subject to:
(a)
disease control measures as provided for in point (f)(ii) of Article 55(1), Articles 56, 64 and 65, Article 74(1) and Article 79, and the rules adopted pursuant to Article 55(2), Article 67, Articles 71(3) and 74(4), Article 83(2), or
(b)
emergency measures as provided for in Articles 257 and 258 and the rules adopted pursuant to Article 259,
and those germinal products are of species subject to those disease control or emergency measures, operators shall only move such germinal products within a Member State or from one Member State to another Member State when they are accompanied by an animal health certificate issued by the competent authority of the Member State of origin in accordance with Article 149(1), unless derogations have been granted from the animal health certification requirement in accordance with the rules referred in this subparagraph.
The competent authority may decide that such a certificate does not have to be issued for movements of germinal products within the Member State concerned when that authority considers that an alternative system is in place ensuring that the consignment of such germinal products is traceable and that those germinal products comply with the animal health requirements for such movement.
3.   Operators shall take all necessary measures to ensure that the animal health certificate referred to in paragraph 1 accompanies the germinal products from their place of origin to their place of destination.
4.   The competent authority shall, upon request by an operator, issue an animal health certificate for the movements of germinal products referred to in paragraph 1, provided that the relevant requirements referred to in Chapter 5 of Title I of Part IV have been complied with.
5.   Articles 148, 149 and 150, and the rules adopted pursuant to Articles 146 and 147 and Article 149(4), shall apply to the animal health certification of the germinal products referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article. Article 151(1) and the rules adopted pursuant to Article 151(3) shall apply to the self–declaration of movements of germinal products.
6.   The Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 264 concerning derogations from the animal health certificate requirements provided for in paragraph 1 of this Article as regards movements of germinal products of kept animals of the bovine, ovine, caprine, porcine and equine species and germinal products of poultry which do not pose a significant risk for the spread of listed diseases due to:
(a)
the nature of the germinal products concerned or the species of animal that those products come from;
(b)
the methods of production and processing at the germinal product establishment;
(c)
the intended use of the germinal products;
(d)
alternative risk-mitigation measures in place for the type and category of germinal products and the germinal product establishment;
(e)
the place of destination of the germinal products, when the place of destination is in the same Member State as the place of origin but the germinal products pass through another Member State in order to reach the place of destination.
