Article 167
Operators' obligations with regard to animal health certificates and delegated acts
1.   Operators shall only move the following products of animal origin within a Member State or to another Member State where the products in question are accompanied by an animal health certificate issued by the competent authority of the Member State of origin in accordance with paragraph 3:
(a)
products of animal origin that:
(i)
are allowed to be moved from a restricted zone subject to emergency measures as provided for in rules adopted pursuant to Article 259;
(ii)
originate from animals of species subject to those emergency measures;
(b)
products of animal origin that:
(i)
are allowed to be moved from a restricted zone subject to disease control measures in accordance with Article 32(1), point (f)(ii) of Article 55(1), Article 56, point (a) of Article 61(1), Article 62(1), Article 64, point (c) of Article 65(1), point (b) of Article 70(1), point (a) of Article 74(1) and Articles 79 and 80 and any rules adopted pursuant to Article 55(2), Articles 63 and 67 and Articles 71(3), 74(4) and 83(2),
(ii)
originate from animals of species subject to those disease control measures.
The competent authority may decide that such a certificate does not have to be issued for movements of products of animal origin within the Member State concerned when that authority considers that an alternative system is in place ensuring that consignments of such products are traceable and that those products fulfil the animal health requirements for such movements.
2.   Operators shall take all necessary measures to ensure that the animal health certificate referred to in paragraph 1 accompanies the products of animal origin from their place of origin to their place of destination.
3.   The competent authority shall, upon request by the operator concerned, issue an animal health certificate for movements of products of animal origin as referred to in paragraph 1, provided that the relevant requirements referred to in this Article have been complied with.
4.   Articles 148, 149 and 150 and the rules adopted pursuant to Articles 146 and 147 and Article 149(4) shall apply to the animal health certification of movements of products of animal origin as referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article.
5.   The Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 264 concerning derogations from the animal health certificate requirements provided for in paragraph 1 of this Article and the conditions for such derogations, in respect of movements of products of animal origin which do not pose a significant risk for the spread of diseases due to:
(a)
the types of products of animal origin concerned;
(b)
the risk-mitigation measures applied to the products of animal origin, thereby reducing the risks of the spread of diseases;
(c)
the intended use of the products of animal origin;
(d)
the place of destination of the products of animal origin.
