Article 76
Obligations of operators and other relevant natural and legal persons and measures to be taken by the competent authority in the event of suspicion of listed diseases as referred to in point (c) of Article 9(1)
1.   In the event of suspicion of a listed disease as referred to in point (c) of Article 9(1) in a Member State that has opted for the eradication programme covering the relevant parts of its territory or zones or compartments thereof, as provided for in Article 31(2), that Member State shall take measures to ensure that operators and other relevant natural and legal persons concerned take appropriate measures as provided for in Article 72(1), pending any disease control measures being taken by the competent authority in accordance with paragraph 2 of this Article.
2.   The competent authority of a Member State that has opted for the eradication of a listed disease as referred to in paragraph 1 shall, in the event that it suspects the disease in question in kept animals:
(a)
conduct without delay an investigation to confirm or rule out the presence of that listed disease in accordance with Article 73(1) and (2);
(b)
pending the results of the investigation provided for in point (a) and the carrying-out of disease control measures in accordance with Article 80(1), carry out the preliminary disease control measures provided for in Article 74(1) and (2).
3.   The competent authority shall review and extend the preliminary disease control measures referred to in point (b) of paragraph 2, in accordance with Article 75.
4.   Paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of this Article shall also apply to Member States or zones which have obtained disease–free status, in order to maintain that status, in accordance with Article 36, or to compartments in accordance with Article 37(2).
5.   The Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 264 concerning detailed rules supplementing rules in respect of:
(a)
the disease control measures provided for in paragraph 1;
(b)
the investigation provided for in point (a) of paragraph 2;
(c)
the preliminary disease control measures to be taken to prevent the spread of the listed disease, as provided for in point (b) of paragraph 2.
