Article 169
Notification of movements of products of animal origin to other Member States
1.   Operators shall:
(a)
inform the competent authority in their Member State of origin in advance of intended movements of products of animal origin when the consignments in question are required to be accompanied by an animal health certificate in accordance with Article 167(1);
(b)
provide all necessary information to enable the competent authority of the Member State of origin to notify the movement in question to the competent authority of the Member State of destination in accordance with paragraph 2.
2.   The competent authority of the Member State of origin shall, prior to the movement and whenever possible through Traces, notify the competent authority of the Member State of destination of movements of products of animal origin in accordance with the rules adopted pursuant to paragraphs 5 and 6.
3.   Member States shall use, for the management of notifications, regions designated in accordance with Article 153(3).
4.   Article 153(4) shall apply to the notification of movements of products of animal origin by operators.
5.   The Commission shall adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 264 concerning:
(a)
the information needed for the notification of movements of products of animal origin as provided for in paragraph 1 of this Article;
(b)
the emergency procedures for the notification of movements of products of animal origin in the event of power cuts and other disturbances of Traces.
6.   The Commission may, by means of implementing acts, lay down rules concerning:
(a)
the information to be provided by operators to the competent authority of their Member State of origin concerning movements of products of animal origin in accordance with paragraph 1;
(b)
notification of movements of products of animal origin to be given by the competent authority of the Member State of origin to the Member State of destination in accordance with paragraph 2;
(c)
the deadlines for:
(i)
provision of the information referred to in paragraph 1 by the operator concerned to the competent authority of the Member State of origin;
(ii)
notification of movements of products of animal origin to be given by the competent authority of the Member State of origin as referred to in paragraph 2.
Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 266(2).
