Article 42
Suspension, withdrawal and restoration of disease–free status
1.   Where a Member State becomes aware, or has reason to suspect, that any of the conditions for maintaining its status as a disease–free Member State or zone or compartment thereof, have been breached, it shall immediately:
(a)
where relevant, depending on the risk, suspend or restrict movements of the listed species, for the listed disease for which it was approved or recognised as having disease-free status, to other Member States, zones or compartments with a higher health status for that listed disease;
(b)
where relevant for the prevention of the spread of a listed disease for which disease–free status has been approved or recognised, apply the disease control measures provided for in Title II of Part III.
2.   The measures provided for in paragraph 1 shall be lifted where further investigation confirms that:
(a)
the suspected breach has not taken place; or
(b)
the suspected breach has not had a significant impact and the Member State concerned can provide assurances that the conditions for maintaining its disease–free status are again fulfilled.
3.   Where further investigation by the Member State concerned confirms that there has been an outbreak of the listed disease for which it obtained disease–free status, or that other significant breaches of the conditions for maintaining disease–free status as referred to in Article 41(1) have occurred, or where there is a significant likelihood of this having occurred, the Member State shall immediately inform the Commission thereof.
4.   The Commission shall, by means of implementing acts, withdraw without undue delay the approval of the disease–free status of a Member State or zone granted in accordance with Article 36(4) or the recognition of the disease–free status of a compartment granted in accordance with Article 37(4) after obtaining the information from the Member State concerned that the conditions for maintaining the disease–free status are no longer met.
Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 266(2).
5.   On duly justified imperative grounds of extreme urgency, where the listed disease referred to in paragraph 3 of this Article spreads in a rapid manner, carrying with it the risk of a highly significant impact on animal or public health, the economy or society, the Commission shall adopt immediately applicable implementing acts in accordance with the procedure provided for in Article 266(3).
6.   The Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 264 concerning provisions supplementing the rules for the suspension, withdrawal and restoration of disease–free status set out in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article.
PART III

DISEASE AWARENESS, PREPAREDNESS AND CONTROL

