Article 21
Publication of information and Commission report
1.   By 30 June each year, the Commission shall make publicly available the information on CO2 emissions reported in accordance with Article 11 as well as the information set out in paragraph 2 of this Article.
2.   The Commission shall include the following in the information to be made publicly available:
(a)
the identity of the ship (name, IMO identification number and port of registry or home port);
(b)
the technical efficiency of the ship (EEDI or EIV, where applicable);
(c)
the annual CO2 emissions;
(d)
the annual total fuel consumption for voyages;
(e)
the annual average fuel consumption and CO2 emissions per distance travelled of voyages;
(f)
the annual average fuel consumption and CO2 emissions per distance travelled and cargo carried on voyages;
(g)
the annual total time spent at sea in voyages;
(h)
the method applied for monitoring;
(i)
the date of issue and the expiry date of the document of compliance;
(j)
the identity of the verifier that assessed the emissions report;
(k)
any other information monitored and reported on a voluntary basis in accordance with Article 10.
3.   Where, due to specific circumstances, disclosure of a category of aggregated data under paragraph 2, which does not relate to CO2 emissions, would exceptionally undermine the protection of commercial interests deserving protection as a legitimate economic interest overriding the public interest in disclosure pursuant to Regulation (EC) No 1367/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council (13), a different level of aggregation of that specific data shall be applied, at the request of the company, so as to protect such interests. Where application of a different level of aggregation is not possible, the Commission shall not make those data publicly available.
4.   The Commission shall publish an annual report on CO2 emissions and other relevant information from maritime transport, including aggregated and explained results, with the aim of informing the public and allowing for an assessment of the CO2 emissions and the energy efficiency of maritime transport per size, type of ships, activity, or any other category deemed relevant.
5.   The Commission shall assess every two years the maritime transport sector's overall impact on the global climate including through non-CO2-related emissions or effects.
6.   Within the framework of its mandate, EMSA shall assist the Commission in its work to comply with this Article and Articles 12 and 17 of this Regulation, in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 1406/2002 of the European Parliament and of the Council (14).
