Article 13
Scope of verification activities and verification report
1.   The verifier shall assess the conformity of the monitoring plan with the requirements laid down in Articles 6 and 7. Where the verifier's assessment identifies non-conformities with those requirements, the company concerned shall revise its monitoring plan accordingly and submit the revised plan for a final assessment by the verifier before the reporting period starts. The company shall agree with the verifier on the timeframe necessary to introduce those revisions. That timeframe shall in any event not extend beyond the beginning of the reporting period.
2.   The verifier shall assess the conformity of the emissions report with the requirements laid down in Articles 8 to 12 and Annexes I and II.
In particular the verifier shall assess whether the CO2 emissions and other relevant information included in the emissions report have been determined in accordance with Articles 8, 9 and 10 and the monitoring plan.
3.   Where the verification assessment concludes, with reasonable assurance from the verifier, that the emissions report is free from material misstatements, the verifier shall issue a verification report stating that the emissions report has been verified as satisfactory. The verification report shall specify all issues relevant to the work carried out by the verifier.
4.   Where the verification assessment concludes that the emissions report includes misstatements or non-conformities with the requirements of this Regulation, the verifier shall inform the company thereof in a timely manner. The company shall then correct the misstatements or non-conformities so as to enable the verification process to be completed in time and shall submit to the verifier the revised emissions report and any other information that was necessary to correct the non-conformities identified. In its verification report, the verifier shall state whether the misstatements or non-conformities identified during the verification assessment have been corrected by the company. Where the communicated misstatements or non-conformities have not been corrected and, individually or combined, lead to material misstatements, the verifier shall issue a verification report stating that the emissions report does not comply with this Regulation.
