Article 5
Integrated urban wastewater management plans
1.   By 31 December 2033, Member States shall ensure that an integrated urban wastewater management plan is established for drainage areas of agglomerations of 100 000 p.e. and above.
2.   At the latest six months after the first update of the river basin management plan produced pursuant to Article 13(7) of Directive 2000/60/EC following 1 January 2025 but no later than 22 June 2028, Member States shall establish a list of agglomerations of between 10 000 p.e. and 100 000 p.e. where, considering historic data, modelling and state-of-the-art climate projections, including seasonal variations, as well as the anthropogenic pressures and the assessment of impacts undertaken under the river basin management plan, one or more of the following conditions apply:
(a)
storm water overflow poses a risk to the environment or human health;
(b)
storm water overflow represents more than 2 % of the annual collected urban wastewater load of the parameters referred to in Table 1 and, where relevant, Table 2 of Annex I, calculated in dry weather flow;
(c)
storm water overflow prevents the fulfilment of any of the following:
(i)
the requirements established under Article 5 of Directive (EU) 2020/2184;
(ii)
the requirements set out in Article 5(3) of Directive 2006/7/EC;
(iii)
the requirements set out in Article 3 of Directive 2008/105/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (35);
(iv)
the environmental objectives set out in Article 4 of Directive 2000/60/EC;
(v)
the requirements set out in Article 1 of Directive 2008/56/EC;
(vi)
the requirements established under Article 3 of Directive 2006/118/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (36);
(d)
relevant points in separate sewers have been identified where urban runoff is expected to be polluted in such a way that its discharge into receiving waters can be considered to be a risk to the environment or human health or prevents the fulfilment of any of the requirements or environmental objectives referred to in point (c).
Member States shall review the list referred to in the first subparagraph every six years after its establishment and update it where necessary.
3.   By 31 December 2039, Member States shall ensure that an integrated urban wastewater management plan is established for drainage areas of agglomerations referred to in paragraph 2.
4.   Integrated urban wastewater management plans shall be made available to the Commission on request.
5.   Integrated urban wastewater management plans shall include at least the elements set out in Annex V, and prioritise green and blue infrastructure solutions wherever possible.
6.   The Commission is empowered to adopt implementing acts to specify:
(a)
methodologies for the identification of the measures referred to in point 3 of Annex V;
(b)
methodologies for the determination of alternative indicators to verify whether the indicative objective of pollution reduction referred to in point 2 (a) of Annex V is achieved;
(c)
the format in which integrated urban wastewater management plans are to be made available to the Commission where requested in accordance with paragraph 4.
Those implementing acts shall be adopted by 2 January 2028 in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 28(2).
7.   Member States shall ensure that integrated urban wastewater management plans are reviewed at least every six years after their establishment and updated where necessary. Following an update of the list referred to in paragraph 2, Member States shall ensure that integrated management plans are established for agglomerations within six years of their inclusion in that list.
