Article 24
Information for the public
1.   Member States shall ensure that adequate, easily accessible and up-to-date information on urban wastewater collection and treatment is available to the public online, in a user-friendly and customised way, for each agglomeration of above 1 000 p.e. or each relevant administrative area. The information shall include at least the data listed in Annex VI.
The information referred to in paragraph 1 shall also be provided by other means upon justified request.
2.   In addition, where costs are recovered totally or partly through a water tariff system, Member States shall ensure that all households in agglomerations of above 10 000 p.e., and preferably above 1 000 p.e., connected to collecting systems receive regularly and at least once a year, in the most appropriate and easily accessible form, for example on their invoice, where available, or by digital means such as smart applications or websites, without having to request it, the following information:
(a)
information on the compliance of the collection and treatment of urban wastewater with Articles 3, 4, 6, 7 and 8, including a comparison between the actual releases of pollutants into receiving waters with the limit values set out in Part B and Tables 1, 2 and 3 of Annex I; that information shall be presented in a manner that allows for easy comparison, for example in the form of a percentage of compliance;
(b)
the volume or estimated volume of urban wastewater collected and treated per year or per billing period for the household or the connected entity in cubic meter, together with trends and the price of urban wastewater collection and treatment for that household (cost per litre and cubic meter);
(c)
a comparison of the yearly volume of urban wastewater collected and treated for the household per year and an indication of the average volume of a household in the agglomeration concerned;
(d)
a link to the online content referred to in paragraph 1.
Where information regarding individual usage is not available, the information referred to in points (a) to (d) shall be provided at agglomeration level in a user-friendly manner via a website or smart application.
3.   The Commission may adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 27 to amend paragraph 2 of this Article and Annex VI by updating the information to be provided to the public online and to the households connected to collecting systems in order to adapt those requirements to technical progress and the availability of data in the field.
4.   The Commission may adopt implementing acts specifying the format and the methods of presenting the information to be provided in accordance with paragraphs 1 and 2. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 28(2).
