Article 22
Information on monitoring of implementation
1.   Member States, assisted by the European Environment Agency (EEA), shall:
(a)
by 31 December 2028, set up a data set containing information collected in accordance with Article 21, including information concerning the parameters referred to in Article 21(1), point (a), and the results of the tests with regard to the pass/fail criteria established in Part C of Annex I and update that data set annually thereafter;
(b)
by 31 December 2028, set up a data set indicating the percentage of urban wastewater which is collected and treated in accordance with Article 3 and update that data set annually thereafter;
(c)
by 31 December 2028, set up a data set containing information on the implementation of Article 4(5) and on the percentage of the urban wastewater load from agglomerations above 2 000 p.e. which is treated in individual systems and update that data set annually thereafter;
(d)
by 31 December 2028, set up a data set containing information on the number of samples collected and the number of samples taken in accordance with Part C of Annex I that have failed and update that data set annually thereafter;
(e)
by 12 January 2029, set up a data set containing information on measures taken to improve access to sanitation in accordance with Article 19, points (a), (b) and (c), including information on the share of their population that has access to sanitation in agglomerations of 10 000 p.e. and above and update that data set every 6 years thereafter;
(f)
by 31 December 2030, set up a data set containing information on GHG emissions with a breakdown between different gases and on the total energy used and renewable energy produced by each urban wastewater treatment plant of 10 000 p.e. and above as well as a calculation of the percentage of achievement of the targets set out in Article 11(2), the percentage of energy purchased from non-fossil fuel sources and, when available accompanied by a breakdown of the different types of non-fossil fuel energy source used, where the derogation referred to in Article 11(3) is used, and update that data set annually thereafter;
(g)
by 31 December 2030, set up a data set containing information on measures taken in accordance with point 3 of Annex V and update that data set annually thereafter;
(h)
by 31 December 2030, set up a data set containing the monitoring results referred to in Article 17(1) and (3) and update that data set annually thereafter;
(i)
by 31 December 2030, set up a data set containing the list of areas identified as sensitive to eutrophication and update that data set in accordance with Article 7(2);
(j)
by 31 December 2030, set up a data set containing the list of areas identified as areas where the concentration or the accumulation of micropollutants represents a risk for the environment or human health and update that data set in accordance with Article 8(2);
(k)
where they use biomedia, set up, by 31 December 2030, a data set containing the type of biomedia used and a short description of the measures taken by urban wastewater treatment plants using biomedia to avoid spills into the environment, and update that data set every five years thereafter;
(l)
by 31 December 2030, set up a data set containing the monitoring results referred to in Article 21(1), point (c), with a comparison of the monthly water and nutrient demand of the crops targeted by the reused fraction of treated urban wastewater referred to in Article 15(1), and update that data set annually thereafter.
2.   Member States shall ensure that the Commission and the EEA have access to the data sets referred to in paragraph 1.
3.   The information reported by Member States in accordance with Article 5 of Regulation (EC) No 166/2006 shall be taken into account for the reporting required under this Article for those pollutants related to urban wastewater.
With regard to the information referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article, the EEA shall provide the public with access to relevant data through the European Pollutant Release and Transfer Register established under Regulation (EC) No 166/2006.
4.   The Commission is empowered to adopt implementing acts specifying the format of the information to be provided in accordance with paragraph 1. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 28(2) by 31 December 2028 for information referred to in paragraph 1, points (e), (f), (g), (h), (j), (k) and (l).
The Commission may adopt implementing acts in order to specify the format of the information to be provided in accordance with paragraph 1, points (a), (b), (c), (d) and (i). Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 28(2).
