Article 24
Inspection database
1.   The Commission shall develop, maintain and update the inspection database, building upon the expertise and experience under the Paris MOU.
The inspection database shall contain all the information required for the implementation of the inspection system set up under this Directive and shall include the functionalities set out in Annex XII.
2.   Member States shall take the appropriate measures to ensure that the information on the actual time of arrival and the actual time of departure of any ship calling at their ports and anchorages, together with an identifier of the port concerned, is transferred within a reasonable time to the inspection database through the Community maritime information exchange system ‘SafeSeaNet’ referred to in Article 3(s) of Directive 2002/59/EC. Once they have transferred such information to the inspection database through SafeSeaNet, Member States are exempted from the provision of data in accordance with paragraphs 1.2 and 2(a) and (b) of Annex XIV to this Directive.
3.   Member States shall ensure that the information related to inspections performed in accordance with this Directive is transferred to the inspection database as soon as the inspection report is completed or the detention lifted.
Within 72 hours, Member States shall ensure that the information transferred to the inspection database is validated for publication purposes.
4.   On the basis of the inspection data provided by Member States, the Commission shall be able to retrieve from the inspection database any relevant data concerning the implementation of this Directive, in particular on the risk profile of the ship, on ships’ due for inspections, on ships’ movement data and on the inspection commitments of each Member State.
Member States shall have access to all the information recorded in the inspection database which is relevant for implementing the inspection procedures of this Directive.
Member States and third signatories to the Paris MOU shall be granted access to any data they have recorded in the inspection database and to data on ships flying their flag.
