Article 4
Areas of cooperation
Union financing shall support cooperation actions in accordance with Article 1 and shall be consistent with the overall purpose, scope, objectives and general principles of this Regulation. Union financing shall cover actions that, in principle, do not fulfil the ODA criteria, and which may include a regional dimension, in the following areas of cooperation:
(1)
the promotion of cooperation, partnerships and joint undertakings between economic, social, cultural, academic and scientific actors in the Union and partner countries;
(2)
the stimulation of bilateral trade, investment flows and economic partnerships, including a focus on small and medium-sized enterprises;
(3)
the promotion of dialogue between political, economic, social and cultural actors and other non-governmental organisations in relevant sectors in the Union and partner countries;
(4)
the promotion of people-to-people links, education and training programmes and intellectual exchanges and the enhancement of mutual understanding between cultures, particularly at the family level, including measures to ensure and increase Union participation in Erasmus Mundus and participation in European education fairs;
(5)
the promotion of cooperative projects in areas such as research, science and technology, sports and culture, energy (in particular renewable energy), transport, environmental matters (including climate change), customs, financial, legal and human rights issues, and any other matter of mutual interest between the Union and partner countries;
(6)
the enhancement of awareness about and understanding of the Union and of its visibility in partner countries;
(7)
support for specific initiatives, including research work, studies, pilot schemes or joint projects destined to respond in an effective and flexible manner to cooperation objectives arising from developments in the Union’s bilateral relationships with partner countries or aiming to provide impetus to the further deepening and broadening of bilateral relationships with them.

(*1)  
                                          OJ L 378, 27.12.2006, p. 41."
                        

(*2)  
                                          OJ L 354, 31.12.2008, p. 62.’;"
                        
(3)
in Article 5, paragraph 2 is replaced by the following:
‘2.   Multiannual cooperation programmes shall cover no more than the period of validity of this Regulation. They shall set out the Union’s specific interests and priorities, the general objectives and the expected results. In particular with regard to Erasmus Mundus, programmes shall aim for the most balanced geographical coverage possible. They shall also set out the areas selected for financing by the Union and outline the indicative financial allocation of funds, overall, per priority area and per partner country or group of partner countries for the period concerned. Where appropriate, this may be given in the form of a range. Multiannual cooperation programmes shall be reviewed at mid-term, or ad hoc if necessary.’;
(4)
the following Article is added:
‘Article 5a
The Union’s strategic interests, general objectives, priority areas for financing and expected results for cooperation with partner countries listed in Annex II
The multiannual cooperation programmes referred to in Article 5 with partner countries listed in Annex II shall be based on the following general objectives, priority areas for financing and expected results:
(1)
Public diplomacy and outreach, having as objectives:
—
to promote widespread understanding and visibility of the Union,
—
to promote the Union’s views on important policy issues and the Union’s values of democracy, respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms,
—
to encourage reflection and discussion on the Union and its policies, and on Union relations with partner countries listed in Annex II,
—
to develop new approaches that give momentum to positive, result-oriented relations with countries which have little or no knowledge of the Union.
Activities in support of those objectives should lead to a better perception and enhanced mutual understanding of the Union and of partner countries listed in Annex II, with a consequent beneficial effect on the economic and political relationships of the Union with its partners.
(2)
Economic partnership and business cooperation, having as objective:
—
to facilitate market access for Union companies, notably through programmes supporting them (including relevant regulatory support in relation to trade barriers), drawing on experience from long-standing business cooperation programmes.
Those programmes should, whenever applicable, be complementary to existing support measures. Those programmes should deliver concrete opportunities for improved business and scientific cooperation, increased turnover and investments in target areas and greater trade flows with partner countries listed in Annex II.
Those efforts shall be consistent with, and complementary to, the Commission’s broader strategy to develop Union competitiveness in global markets, and other Union policies towards specific regions and countries.
Resources shall be focused on countries where interventions can increase the participation of Union companies. Small and medium-sized Union enterprises, seeking access to the Asian, Latin American, Middle Eastern and South African markets shall be an important focus. Where appropriate, resources shall be focused on countries complying with the core labour standards of the ILO and which contribute to the global efforts to pursue reductions of greenhouse gas emissions.
(3)
People-to-people links, having as objectives:
—
to support high quality partnerships between higher education institutions in the Union and in third-countries as a basis for structured cooperation, exchange and mobility, at all levels of higher education (Action 2 — Strand 2: Partnerships with countries and territories covered by the Industrialised Countries Instrument), under Erasmus Mundus II. Action 2,
—
to supplement Erasmus Mundus Action 2 scholarships, funded from the Development Cooperation Instrument (Action 2 — Strand 1: Partnerships with countries covered by the European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument, the Development Cooperation Instrument, the European Development Fund and the Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance (former External Cooperation Window)), by supporting the mobility of Union students and professors to third countries,
—
to promote together with civil society in its widest sense a better understanding of the Union as such, its positions on global issues and of economic, social and political integration processes, thus complementing the Union’s formal relationships with governments,
—
to promote cooperation, partnerships and joint undertakings between economic, social, cultural, academic and scientific actors in the Union and partner countries.
Those activities should help produce mutual benefits from education, culture and civil society cooperation. This shall be done through improvements in the quality of education offered and from confronting the mutual challenges of developing knowledge-based societies. The activities undertaken should add value to the cross-fertilisation of ideas, knowledge, research and technology results through academic and professional exchanges, particularly with partner countries that have higher education systems comparable to those of the Union.’;
(5)
in Article 6, paragraph 1 is replaced by the following:
‘1.   The Commission shall adopt annual action programmes based on the multiannual cooperation programmes referred to in Article 5 and shall transmit them simultaneously to the European Parliament and to the Council.’;
(6)
Article 7 is amended as follows:
(a)
the first paragraph becomes paragraph 1;
(b)
points (e) and (f) of paragraph 1 are replaced by the following:
‘(e)
joint bodies set up by partner countries and regions and the Union;
(f)
Union institutions and bodies, in so far as they implement support measures specified in Article 9;’;
(c)
the following paragraphs are added:
‘2.   Measures covered by Council Regulation (EC) No 1257/96 of 20 June 1996 concerning humanitarian aid (*3), Regulation (EC) No 1717/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 November 2006 establishing an Instrument for Stability (*4) or Regulation (EC) No 1905/2006, and eligible for funding thereunder shall not be funded under this Regulation.
3.   Union financing under this Regulation shall not be used to finance the procurement of arms or ammunition, nor operations having military or defence implications.

(*3)  
                                                   OJ L 163, 2.7.1996, p. 1."
                        

(*4)  
                                                   OJ L 327, 24.11.2006, p. 1.’;"
                        
(7)
in Article 8, paragraph 3 is replaced by the following:
‘3.   Union financing shall, in principle, not be used for paying taxes, duties or charges in the partner countries.’;
(8)
Article 9 is amended as follows:
(a)
paragraph 1 is replaced by the following:
‘1.   Union financing may cover expenditure associated with the preparation, follow up, monitoring, audit and evaluation activities directly necessary for the implementation of this Regulation and the achievement of its objectives, and any other administrative or technical assistance expenditure that the Commission, including its Delegations in partner countries, may incur for the management of operations financed under this Regulation.’;
(b)
paragraph 3 is replaced by the following:
‘3.   The Commission shall adopt support measures not covered by the multiannual cooperation programmes and shall transmit them simultaneously to the European Parliament and to the Council.’;
(9)
Article 12 is amended as follows:
(a)
the title is replaced by the following:
‘Protecting the Union’s financial interests’;
(b)
paragraphs 1 and 2 are replaced by the following:
‘1.   Any agreements resulting from this Regulation shall contain provisions ensuring the protection of the Union’s financial interests, in particular with respect to irregularities, fraud, corruption and any other illegal activity, in accordance with Council Regulations (EC, Euratom) No 2988/95 of 18 December 1995 on the protection of the European Communities financial interests (*5) and (Euratom, EC) No 2185/96 of 11 November 1996 concerning on the spot checks and inspections carried out by the Commission in order to protect the European Communities’ financial interests against fraud and other irregularities (*6) and Regulation (EC) No 1073/1999 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 May 1999 concerning investigations conducted by the European Anti-Fraud Office (OLAF) (*7).
2.   Agreements shall expressly entitle the Commission and the Court of Auditors to perform audits, including document audits or on-the-spot audits of any contractor or subcontractor who has received Union funds. They shall also expressly authorise the Commission to carry out on-the-spot checks and inspections in accordance with Regulation (Euratom, EC) No 2185/96.

(*5)  
                                                   OJ L 312, 23.12.1995, p. 1."
                        

(*6)  
                                                   OJ L 292, 15.11.1996, p. 2."
                        

(*7)  
                                                   OJ L 136, 31.5.1999, p. 1.’;"
                        
(10)
Articles 13 and 14 are replaced by the following:
‘Article 13
Evaluation
1.   The Commission shall regularly evaluate the actions and programmes financed under this Regulation, where appropriate or at the request of the European Parliament or the Council, by means of independent external evaluation reports, in order to ascertain whether the objectives have been met and to enable it to formulate recommendations with a view to improving future operations. The results shall feed back into programme design and resource allocation.
2.   The Commission shall send the evaluation reports referred to in paragraph 1 to the European Parliament and to the Council for information.
3.   The Commission shall associate relevant stakeholders, including non-State actors, in the evaluation phase of the Union cooperation provided for under this Regulation.
