Article 19
User information
1.   Relevant, consistent and clear information shall be made available as regards motor vehicles placed on the market which are capable of being regularly recharged or refuelled.
That information shall be made available:
(a)
in motor vehicle manuals and on motor vehicles, by the manufacturers, when those vehicles are placed on the market;
(b)
at recharging and refuelling points, by recharging and refuelling point operators; and
(c)
in motor vehicle dealerships, by the distributors.
2.   Whether vehicles and infrastructures or fuels and vehicles covered by paragraph 1 of this Article are compatible shall be determined in compliance with the technical specifications referred to in points 10.1 and 10.2 of Annex II.
Where such technical specifications refer to a graphical expression, including a colour coding scheme, the graphical expression shall be simple and easy to understand.
That graphical expression shall be placed in a clearly visible manner:
(a)
by refuelling point operators, on corresponding pumps and their nozzles at all refuelling points operated by them, from the date on which fuels are placed on the market;
(b)
by manufacturer, in the immediate proximity of all fuel tanks’ filling caps of motor vehicles recommended for and compatible with that fuel and in motor vehicle manuals, when such motor vehicles are placed on the market.
3.   When fuel prices are shown at a refuelling station, Member States shall ensure that a comparison of the relevant unit prices is shown, where appropriate, and in particular for hydrogen, for information purposes following the common methodology for alternative fuels unit price comparison referred to in point 10.3 of Annex II.
4.   In situations where European standards setting the technical specifications of a fuel do not include labelling requirements to indicate compliance with the standards concerned, where the labelling requirements do not refer to a graphical expression, including colour coding schemes, or where the labelling requirements are not suitable for achieving the objectives of this Regulation, the Commission may, for the purposes of the uniform implementation of paragraphs 1 and 2, mandate the European standardisation organisations to develop compatibility labelling specifications.
On the basis of the compatibility labelling specifications developed by the European standardisation organisations pursuant to the mandate referred to in the first subparagraph, the Commission shall adopt implementing acts determining the graphical expression, including a colour coding scheme, of compatibility for fuels introduced in the Union market which reach the level of 1 % of the total volume of sales, in the assessment of the Commission, in more than one Member State.
Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 23(2).
5.   Where provisions on labelling of the respective European standards are updated or new European standards for alternative fuels are developed, the corresponding requirements on labelling shall apply to all recharging and refuelling points no later than 24 months after the corresponding implementing act is adopted and to all motor vehicles placed on the market from the date that the corresponding implementing act enters into force.
