Article 7
Hydrogen refuelling infrastructure
1.   Operators of hydrogen refuelling points shall, at the publicly accessible refuelling points operated by them, provide end users with the possibility to refuel on an ad hoc basis.
Ad hoc refuelling shall be possible at all publicly accessible hydrogen refuelling points using a payment instrument that is widely used in the Union. To that end, operators of those points shall accept electronic payments through terminals and devices used for payment services, including at least one of the following:
(a)
payment card readers;
(b)
devices with a contactless functionality that is at least able to read payment cards.
For publicly accessible hydrogen refuelling points deployed after 13 April 2024, the requirements set out in this paragraph shall apply from their deployment. For publicly accessible refuelling points deployed before 13 April 2024, the requirements set out in this paragraph shall apply from 14 October 2024.
Where the operator of the hydrogen refuelling point is not the owner of that point, the owner shall make available to the operator, in accordance with the arrangements between them, hydrogen refuelling points with the technical characteristics which enable the operator to comply with the obligations set out in this paragraph.
2.   Prices charged by the operators of publicly accessible hydrogen refuelling points shall be reasonable, easily and clearly comparable, transparent and non-discriminatory. Operators of publicly accessible hydrogen refuelling points shall not discriminate, through the prices charged, between end users and mobility service providers or between different mobility service providers. However, the level of prices may be differentiated, but only if the differentiation is objectively justified.
3.   Operators of hydrogen refuelling points shall clearly show information on the ad hoc price per kg at the publicly accessible hydrogen refuelling stations operated by them, so that that information is known to end users before they initiate a refuelling session and price comparison is facilitated.
4.   Operators of publicly accessible hydrogen refuelling stations may provide hydrogen refuelling services to customers on a contractual basis, including in the name and on behalf of other mobility service providers. Mobility service providers shall charge prices to end users that are reasonable, transparent and non-discriminatory. Mobility service providers shall make available to end users all price information specific to their intended refuelling session prior to its start, through freely available, widely supported electronic means, clearly distinguishing all price components charged by the operator of the hydrogen refuelling point, including applicable e-roaming costs and other fees or charges applied by them.
