Article 17
Review of national policy frameworks and national progress reports
1.   By 31 December 2026, the Commission shall assess the national policy framework notified by Member States pursuant to Article 14(11) and shall submit to the European Parliament and to the Council a report on the assessment of those national policy frameworks and their coherence at Union level, including a first assessment of the expected level of achievement of the national targets and objectives referred to in Article 14(2).
2.   The Commission shall assess the national progress reports submitted by Member States pursuant to Article 15(1) and shall, as appropriate, issue recommendations to Member States to ensure the achievement of the objectives and compliance with the obligations laid down in this Regulation.
3.   The Member State concerned shall, within six months of receipt of the recommendations referred to in paragraph 2, notify the Commission of how it intends to implement the recommendations. If the Member State concerned decides not to implement the recommendations or a substantial part thereof, it shall provide the Commission with its reasons.
4.   After the submission by the Member State of the notification or the reasoning referred to in paragraph 3, the Member State concerned shall set out in its next national progress report how it has implemented the recommendations.
5.   The Commission shall submit to the European Parliament and to the Council a report on its assessment of the national progress reports one year after submission of those national progress reports by Member States pursuant to Article 15(1). That assessment shall contain an evaluation of:
(a)
the progress made by Member States with regard to the achievement of the targets and objectives referred to in Article 14(2), including the Member States’ responses to the Commission recommendations pursuant to paragraph 2 of this Article;
(b)
the coherence of the development of alternative fuel infrastructure at Union level.
6.   On the basis of the final national policy frameworks referred to in Article 14(11), the national progress reports referred to in Article 15(1) and the reports referred to in Article 18(1), the Commission shall make publicly available and regularly update information on the national targets and the objectives submitted by each Member State regarding:
(a)
the number of publicly accessible recharging points and recharging stations, separately for recharging points dedicated to light-duty vehicles and recharging points and recharging stations dedicated to heavy-duty vehicles, and in accordance with the categorisation provided for in Annex III;
(b)
the number of publicly accessible hydrogen refuelling points;
(c)
the infrastructure for shore-side electricity supply in maritime ports and inland waterway ports of the TEN-T core network and TEN-T comprehensive network;
(d)
the infrastructure for electricity supply for stationary aircraft in airports of the TEN-T core network and TEN-T comprehensive network;
(e)
the number of refuelling points for liquefied methane in maritime ports and inland waterway ports of the TEN-T core network and TEN-T comprehensive network;
(f)
the number of publicly accessible refuelling points for liquefied methane for motor vehicles;
(g)
the number of publicly accessible refuelling points for CNG for motor vehicles;
(h)
recharging and refuelling points for other alternative fuels in maritime ports and inland waterway ports of the TEN-T core network and TEN-T comprehensive network;
(i)
recharging and refuelling points for other alternative fuels at airports of the TEN-T core network and TEN-T comprehensive network;
(j)
recharging and refuelling points for alternative fuels for rail transport.
