Article 14
National policy frameworks
1.   By 31 December 2024, each Member State shall prepare and transmit to the Commission a draft national policy framework for the development of the market as regards alternative fuels in the transport sector and the deployment of the relevant infrastructure.
2.   The national policy framework shall contain at least the following elements:
(a)
an assessment of the current state and future development of the market as regards alternative fuels in the transport sector, and of the development of alternative fuels infrastructure, considering intermodal access of alternative fuels infrastructure and, where relevant, cross-border continuity and the development of alternative fuels infrastructure on islands and in the outermost regions;
(b)
national targets and objectives pursuant to Articles 3, 4, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12 for which mandatory national targets are set out in this Regulation;
(c)
policies and measures necessary to ensure that the mandatory targets and objectives referred to in point (b) are reached;
(d)
measures, planned or adopted, to promote the deployment of alternative fuels infrastructure for captive fleets, in particular for recharging stations and hydrogen refuelling stations for public transport services and recharging stations for car sharing;
(e)
measures, planned or adopted, to encourage and facilitate the deployment of recharging stations for light-duty and heavy-duty vehicles in private locations that are not accessible to the public;
(f)
measures, planned or adopted, to promote alternative fuels infrastructure in urban nodes, in particular with respect to publicly accessible recharging points;
(g)
measures, planned or adopted, to promote a sufficient number of publicly accessible high-power recharging points;
(h)
measures, planned or adopted, necessary to ensure that the deployment and operation of recharging points, including the geographical distribution of bidirectional recharging points, contribute to the flexibility of the energy system and to the penetration of renewable electricity into the electric system;
(i)
measures to ensure that publicly accessible recharging and refuelling points for alternative fuels are accessible to older persons, persons with reduced mobility and persons with disabilities in accordance with the accessibility requirements of Directive (EU) 2019/882;
(j)
measures, planned or adopted, to remove possible obstacles with regard to planning, permitting, procuring and operating of alternative fuels infrastructure;
(k)
an overview of the state of play, perspectives and planned measures in respect of the deployment of alternative fuels infrastructure in maritime ports other than for liquefied methane and shore-side electricity supply for use by seagoing vessels, such as for hydrogen, ammonia, methanol and electricity;
(l)
an overview of the state of play, perspectives and planned measures in respect of deployment of alternative fuels infrastructure including targets, key milestones and financing needed, for hydrogen- or battery-powered trains on TEN-T rail sections that cannot be electrified;
(m)
an overview of the state of play, perspectives and planned measures in respect of deployment of alternative fuels infrastructure in airports other than for electricity supply to stationary aircraft, such as for electric recharging and hydrogen refuelling for aircrafts;
(n)
an overview of the state of play, perspectives, and planned measures in respect of deployment of alternative fuels infrastructure in inland navigation, such as for electricity and hydrogen.
3.   The national policy framework may contain the following elements:
(a)
an overview of the state of play, perspectives and planned measures for the deployment of alternative fuels infrastructure in maritime ports, such as for electricity and hydrogen, for port services as defined in Regulation (EU) 2017/352 of the European Parliament and of the Council (31);
(b)
national targets and measures to promote alternative fuels infrastructure along the road networks which are not included in the TEN-T core network or TEN-T comprehensive network, in particular with respect to publicly accessible recharging points;
(c)
measures to guarantee accessibility of recharging and refuelling infrastructure in the entire territory of the Member State, paying particular attention to rural areas to ensure their accessibility and territorial cohesion;
(d)
measures to ensure that the density of publicly accessible alternative fuels infrastructure available at national level takes into account population density;
(e)
national targets and objectives for the deployment of alternative fuels infrastructure related to points (a), (b), (c) and (d) for which no mandatory targets are laid down in this Regulation.
4.   Member States shall ensure that the national policy frameworks take into account the needs of the different transport modes existing on their territory.
5.   Member States shall ensure that national policy frameworks take into account, as appropriate, the interests of regional and local authorities, in particular where recharging and refuelling infrastructure for public transport is concerned, as well as those of the stakeholders concerned.
6.   Where necessary, Member States shall cooperate, by means of consultations or joint policy frameworks, to ensure that the measures required to achieve the objectives of this Regulation are coherent and coordinated. In particular, Member States shall cooperate on establishing strategies on the use of alternative fuels and on the deployment of corresponding infrastructure in waterborne transport. The Commission shall assist the Member States in the cooperation process.
7.   Support measures for alternative fuels infrastructure shall comply with the relevant Union State aid rules.
8.   Each Member State shall make its draft national policy framework publicly available and shall ensure that the public is given early and effective opportunities to participate in the preparation of the draft national policy framework.
9.   The Commission shall assess the draft national policy frameworks and may issue recommendations to Member States. Those recommendations shall be issued no later than six months after the submission of the draft national policy frameworks as referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article. They may, in particular, address:
(a)
the level of ambition of targets and objectives with a view to complying with the obligations set out in Articles 3, 4, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12 and 13;
(b)
policies and measures relating to national targets and objectives.
10.   Each Member State shall take due account of any recommendations from the Commission in its final national policy framework. If the Member State concerned does not address a recommendation or a substantial part thereof, that Member State shall provide a written explanation to the Commission.
11.   By 31 December 2025, each Member State shall draft its final national policy framework in an easily readable and understandable form and notify it to the Commission. Those final national policy frameworks shall be made publicly available by the Commission.
