Article 15
National reporting
1.   By 31 December 2027 and every two years thereafter, each Member State shall submit to the Commission a standalone national progress report on the implementation of its national policy framework. The report shall be drafted in an easily readable and understandable form and shall be made publicly available by the Commission.
2.   The national progress report shall cover the information listed in Annex I and shall, where appropriate, include a relevant justification of the level of achievement of the national targets and objectives referred to in Article 14(2), as well as an indication of the measures to be taken to achieve those targets and objectives in the future.
3.   By 30 June 2024 and every three years thereafter, Member States shall assess how the deployment and operation of recharging points could enable electric vehicles to further contribute to the flexibility of the energy system, including their participation in the balancing market, and to the further absorption of renewable electricity. That assessment shall take into account all types of recharging points, including those offering smart and bi-directional recharging, and all power outputs, whether public or private, and provide recommendations in terms of type of recharging point, supporting technology and geographical distribution in order to facilitate the ability of users to integrate their electric vehicles in the system. That assessment shall identify appropriate measures to be implemented in order to meet the requirements set out in this Regulation including those to ensure the consistency of infrastructure planning with the corresponding grid planning. That assessment shall take into account input from all stakeholders and shall be made publicly available. Each Member State may request its regulatory authority to carry out that assessment. On the basis of the results of the assessment, Member States shall, if necessary, take appropriate measures for the deployment of additional recharging points and include those measures in the national progress reports referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article. The assessment and measures shall be taken into account by the system operators in the network development plans referred to in Article 32(3) and Article 51 of Directive (EU) 2019/944.
4.   On the basis of input from transmission system operators and distribution system operators, the regulatory authority of each Member State shall assess, by 30 June 2024 and every three years thereafter, the potential contribution of bidirectional recharging to reducing user and system costs and increasing the renewable electricity share in the electricity system. That assessment shall be made publicly available. On the basis of the results of the assessment, Member States shall, if necessary, take appropriate measures to adjust the availability and geographical distribution of bidirectional recharging points in private areas and include them in the national progress reports referred to in paragraph 1.
