Article 6
Targets for hydrogen refuelling infrastructure of road vehicles
1.   Member States shall ensure that, in their territory, a minimum number of publicly accessible hydrogen refuelling stations are deployed by 31 December 2030.
To that end, Member States shall ensure that by 31 December 2030 publicly accessible hydrogen refuelling stations designed for a minimum cumulative capacity of 1 tonne per day and equipped with at least a 700 bar dispenser are deployed with a maximum distance of 200 km between them along the TEN-T core network.
Member States shall ensure that, by 31 December 2030, at least one publicly accessible hydrogen refuelling station is deployed in each urban node. Member States shall ensure that an analysis is carried out to determine the best location for such refuelling stations and that the analysis examines in particular the deployment of such refuelling stations in multimodal hubs where other transport modes could also be supplied.
Member States shall set out in their national policy frameworks a clear linear trajectory towards meeting the 2030 targets, along with a clear indicative target for 2027 that delivers sufficient coverage of the TEN-T core network with a view to meeting developing market demands.
2.   Neighbouring Member States shall ensure that the maximum distance referred to in paragraph 1, second subparagraph, is not exceeded for cross-border sections of the TEN-T core network.
3.   The operator of a publicly accessible refuelling station, or, where the operator is not the owner, the owner of that station in accordance with the arrangements between them, shall ensure that the station is designed to serve light-duty and heavy-duty vehicles.
4.   By way of derogation from paragraph 1 of this Article, along roads of the TEN-T core network with a total annual average daily traffic of fewer than 2 000 heavy-duty vehicles and where the deployment of infrastructure cannot be justified in socio-economic cost-benefit terms, Member States may reduce by up to 50 % the capacity of a publicly accessible hydrogen refuelling station required pursuant to paragraph 1 of this Article, provided that the requirements set out in that paragraph in terms of the maximum distance between hydrogen refuelling stations and the dispenser pressure are complied with. Member States shall notify the Commission of any cases in which they have made use of the derogation referred to in this paragraph. Member States shall review those cases every two years as part of the national progress reporting referred to in Article 15.
5.   By way of derogation from paragraph 1 of this Article, if the costs of the deployment of the infrastructure are disproportionate to the benefits, including the environmental benefits, Member States may decide not to apply paragraph 1 of this Article to:
(a)
outermost regions of the Union referred to in Article 349 TFEU; or
(b)
islands falling within the definition of small connected systems or small isolated systems according to Directive (EU) 2019/944.
In such cases, Member States shall justify their decisions to the Commission and shall make available all relevant information in their national policy frameworks.
