Article 24
Reporting and review
1.   By 31 December 2024, the Commission shall submit to the European Parliament and to the Council a technology and market-readiness report dedicated to heavy-duty vehicles. That report shall take into account the initial indications of the preferences of the market. It shall also consider technological developments and the development of the technical specifications achieved by that date and developments expected in the short term, in particular regarding recharging and refuelling standards and technologies, such as high-power recharging standards and electric road systems, and the use of liquid hydrogen.
Regarding hydrogen refuelling stations, the Commission shall further assess the requirements referred to in Article 6 in light of the technological and market developments, the need to specify a higher capacity for those stations, the need to specify targets for liquid hydrogen refuelling infrastructure, as well as the date for the extension of the requirements for the deployment of hydrogen refuelling stations to the TEN-T comprehensive network.
2.   By 31 December 2026 and every five years thereafter, the Commission shall review this Regulation.
In its review, the Commission shall assess, in particular, the following elements:
(a)
whether the traffic thresholds referred to in Article 3(6) and (7), in Article 4(4) and (5) and in Article 6(4) are still relevant in view of the expected increase of the share of hydrogen-powered vehicles or battery electric vehicles compared to the total fleet of vehicles circulating in the Union;
(b)
whether the electronic means of payment referred to in Article 5(1) are still appropriate;
(c)
the functioning of the pricing mechanism for publicly accessible recharging stations and whether the pricing components laid down in Article 5(4), provide consumers with clear and sufficient information;
(d)
a possible decrease of the gross tonnage threshold, laid down in Article 9, as well as a possible extension of the scope of this Regulation to other ship types following relevant adjustments in other relevant Union legal acts;
(e)
the current state and future development of the market for hydrogen and electric propulsion aviation;
(f)
the effects of this Regulation as regards the potential and the magnitude of carbon leakage.
As part of this review, the Commission shall also assess the extent to which the implementation of this Regulation has met its objectives and the extent to which it has impacted the competitiveness of the relevant sectors covered by it. That review shall also cover the interaction of this Regulation with other relevant Union legal acts and shall identify any provisions that could be updated and simplified, as well as actions and measures that have been or could be taken to reduce the total cost pressure on relevant sectors. As part of the Commission’s analysis of the efficiency of this Regulation, the review shall also include an assessment of the burden this Regulation imposes on businesses.
3.   The Commission shall consider, if appropriate, whether to accompany that review with a proposal to amend this Regulation, in view of the outcome of the assessment referred to in paragraph 2.
