Article 15
Review and adaptation of the framework
1.   The values and calculation methods referred to in Annexes II, III, IV and V shall be adapted to technical progress in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 16(2).
2.   Before 1 January 2008, the Commission, in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 16(2), shall further refine and complement as required points 2 to 6 of Annex IV, whilst respecting the general framework set out in Annex IV.
3.   Before 1 January 2012, the Commission, in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 16(2), shall raise the percentage of harmonised bottom-up calculations used in the harmonised calculation model referred to in point 1 of Annex IV, without prejudice to those Member State schemes that already use a higher percentage. The new harmonised calculation model with a significantly higher percentage of bottom-up calculations shall first be used as from 1 January 2012.
Wherever practicable and possible, the measurement of total savings over the total period of application of the Directive shall use this harmonised calculation model, without prejudice to those Member State schemes that use a higher percentage of bottom-up calculations.
4.   Not later than 30 June 2008, the Commission, in accordance with the procedure set out in Article 16(2), shall develop a set of harmonised energy efficiency indicators and benchmarks based upon them, taking into account available data or data that can be collected in a cost-effective manner for each Member State. For the development of these harmonised energy efficiency indicators and benchmarks the Commission shall use as a reference guide the indicative list set out in Annex V. Member States shall gradually integrate these indicators and benchmarks into the statistical data included in their EEAPs as referred to in Article 14, and use them as one of the tools at their disposal to decide on future priority areas in the EEAPs.
Not later than 17 May 2011, the Commission shall present to the European Parliament and the Council a report on the progress in setting indicators and benchmarks.
