Article 6
Eligible actions
1.   In order for actions to be eligible for funding under the Instrument, those actions must comply with the following requirements:
(a)
implement the objectives set out in Article 3; and
(b)
support the purchase, maintenance or upgrading of customs control equipment including innovative detection technology equipment, that has one or more of the following customs control purposes:
(1)
non-intrusive inspection;
(2)
indication of hidden objects on humans;
(3)
radiation detection and nuclide identification;
(4)
analysis of samples in laboratories;
(5)
sampling and field analysis of samples;
(6)
handheld search.
Annex I contains an indicative list of customs control equipment that may be used to achieve the customs control purposes referred to in points (1) to (6) of the first subparagraph.
2.   In duly justified cases, actions under the first subparagraph of paragraph 1 may also cover the transparent purchase, maintenance and upgrading of customs control equipment for testing new pieces of equipment or new functionalities for existing pieces of equipment in operational conditions.
3.   In accordance with point (a) of the second subparagraph of Article 193(2) of the Financial Regulation, taking into account the delayed entry into force of this Regulation and in order to avoid any delay in Union support which could be prejudicial to the Union’s interest in being properly equipped to ensure the efficient and effective operation of the customs union, costs incurred in respect of actions supported under this Regulation may, for a limited period, exceptionally be considered eligible from 1 January 2021, even if those actions were implemented and those costs incurred before the grant application was submitted.
4.   The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 14 to amend this Regulation by updating, where necessary, the indicative list of customs control equipment set out in Annex I.
5.   Customs control equipment financed under this Instrument should be used primarily for customs controls, but may also be used for additional purposes, including, in support of the national border management authorities and investigation, for the control of persons. Such customs control equipment shall not be systematically shared between customs and other border authorities.
6.   The Commission shall encourage the joint procurement and joint testing of customs control equipment by two or more Member States.
