Article 11
Reduction of payments
1.   Member States shall reduce the amount of direct payments to be granted to a farmer pursuant to Chapter 1 of Title III for a given calendar year by at least 5 % for the part of the amount exceeding EUR 150 000.
2.   Before applying paragraph 1, Member States may subtract the salaries linked to an agricultural activity actually paid and declared by the farmer in the previous calendar year, including taxes and social contributions related to employment, from the amount of direct payments to be granted to a farmer pursuant to Chapter 1 of Title III in a given calendar year. Where no data is available on the salaries actually paid and declared by the farmer in the previous calendar year, the most recent data available shall be used.
3.   Where a Member State decides to grant a redistributive payment to farmers pursuant to Chapter 2 of Title III and to use more than 5 % of the annual national ceiling set out in Annex II for that purpose, it may decide not to apply this Article.
Where a Member State decides to grant a redistributive payment to farmers pursuant to Chapter 2 of Title III and the application of the maximum limits set out in Article 41(4) prevents it from using more than 5 % of the annual national ceiling set out in Annex II for that purpose, that Member State may decide not to apply this Article.
4.   No advantage by means of avoiding reductions of the payment shall be granted in favour of farmers in respect of whom it is established that they artificially created, after 18 October 2011, the conditions to avoid the effects of this Article.
5.   In the case of a legal person, or a group of natural or legal persons, Member States may apply the reduction referred to in paragraph 1 at the level of the members of those legal persons or groups where national law provides for the individual members to assume rights and obligations comparable to those of individual farmers who have the status of a head of holding, in particular as regards their economic, social and tax status, provided that they have contributed to strengthening the agricultural structures of the legal persons or groups concerned.
6.   Member States shall notify the Commission by 1 August 2014 of the decisions taken in accordance with this Article and of any estimated product of reductions for the years 2015 to 2019.
