Article 64
Special conditions
1.   During the participation in the small farmers scheme, farmers shall:
(a)
keep at least a number of eligible hectares corresponding to the number of owned or leased-in payment entitlements held, or to the number of eligible hectares declared in 2015 in accordance with Article 36(2);
(b)
fulfil the minimum requirement provided for in point (b) of Article 10(1).
2.   Payment entitlements activated in 2015 pursuant to Articles 32 and 33 by a farmer participating in the small farmers scheme shall be considered to be activated entitlements for the duration of the farmer's participation in that scheme.
The owned or leased-in payment entitlements held by the farmer during the participation in that scheme shall not be considered to be unused payment entitlements which are to revert to the national reserve or regional reserves in accordance with point (b) of Article 31(1).
In Member States applying Article 36, the eligible hectares declared in 2015 in accordance with Article 36(2) by a farmer participating in the small farmers scheme shall be considered to be declared for the duration of the participation of the farmer in that scheme.
3.   By way of derogation from Article 34, payment entitlements held by farmers participating in the small farmers scheme shall not be transferable, except in the case of inheritance or anticipated inheritance.
Farmers who, by way of inheritance or anticipated inheritance, receive payment entitlements from a farmer participating in the small farmers scheme shall be eligible to participate in that scheme provided that they meet the requirements to benefit from the basic payment scheme and that they inherit all the payment entitlements held by the farmer from whom they receive the payment entitlements.
4.   Where a Member State opts for the payment method laid down in point (a) of the first subparagraph of Article 63(2) without applying the third subparagraph of Article 63(2), paragraphs 1 and 2 as well as the first subparagraph of paragraph 3 of this Article shall not apply.
5.   In order to ensure legal certainty, the Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 70 setting out the conditions for participation in the scheme where the situation of the participating farmer has changed.
