Article 20
Special national de-mining reserve for Croatia
1.   From 2015 onwards, Croatia shall notify the Commission by 31 January of each year of the areas which have been identified in accordance with Article 57a(10) of Regulation (EC) No 73/2009 and which were returned to use for agricultural activities in the previous calendar year.
Croatia shall also notify the Commission of the number of payment entitlements available to farmers on 31 December of the previous calendar year, as well as the amount remained unspent in the special national de-mining reserve on that same date.
Where applicable, the notifications provided in the first and second subparagraphs shall be made per region as defined in accordance with Article 23(1) of this Regulation.
2.   When adapting Annex II pursuant to Article 6(3), the Commission shall calculate on a yearly basis the amount to be added to the amounts set for Croatia in that Annex in order to finance the support to be granted under the schemes listed in Annex I for the areas referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article. This amount shall be calculated on the basis of the data notified by Croatia in accordance with paragraph 1 of this Article and the estimated average direct payments per hectare in Croatia for the year concerned.
The maximum amount to be added in accordance with the first subparagraph, on the basis of all the areas notified by Croatia in accordance with paragraph 1 of this Article until 2022, shall be EUR 9 600 000 and shall be subject to the schedule of introduction of direct payments in accordance with Article 17. The resulting maximum annual amounts are set out in Annex VII.
3.   The Commission shall adopt implementing acts setting the share of the amount to be added in accordance with paragraph 2 which Croatia shall include in the special national de-mining reserve in order to allocate payment entitlements for the areas referred to in paragraph 1. That share shall be calculated on the basis of the ratio between the ceiling for the basic payment scheme and the national ceiling set out in Annex II before the national ceiling's increase in accordance with paragraph 2. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 71(2).
4.   For the years 2015 to 2022, Croatia shall use the special national de-mining reserve to allocate payment entitlements to farmers on the basis of de-mined land declared by the farmers in the year in question where:
(a)
such land consists of eligible hectares within the meaning of Article 32(2) to (5);
(b)
the land in question was returned to use for agricultural activities during the previous calendar year; and
(c)
the land has been notified to the Commission in accordance with paragraph 1 of this Article.
5.   The value of the payment entitlements established under this Article shall be the national or regional average value of payment entitlements in the year of allocation within the limits of the amount available in the special national de-mining reserve.
6.   In order to take account of the consequences of the return of de-mined land to use for agricultural activities as notified by Croatia in accordance with this Article, the Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 70 adapting the amounts set out in Annex VI.
