Article 34
Transfer of payment entitlements
1.   Payment entitlements may be transferred only to a farmer entitled to be granted direct payments in accordance with Article 9 established in the same Member State, except in the case of transfer by actual or anticipated inheritance.
Payment entitlements, including in the case of actual or anticipated inheritance, may be activated only in the Member State where they were allocated.
2.   Where Member States exercise the option in Article 23(1), payment entitlements may be transferred or activated only within the same region, except in the case of actual or anticipated inheritance.
Payment entitlements, including in the case of actual or anticipated inheritance, may be activated only in the region where they were allocated.
3.   Member States not exercising the option in Article 23(1) may decide that payment entitlements may be transferred or activated only within the same region, except in the case of actual or anticipated inheritance.
Such regions shall be defined at the appropriate territorial level in accordance with objective criteria and in a way that ensures the equal treatment of farmers and avoids distortions of the market and of competition.
4.   Where payment entitlements are transferred without land, Member States may, acting in compliance with the general principles of Union law, decide that a part of the payment entitlements transferred are to revert to the national reserve or regional reserves or that their unit value is to be reduced in favour of the national reserve or regional reserves. Such reduction may be applied to one or more types of transfer.
5.   The Commission shall adopt implementing acts laying down detailed rules governing the notification by farmers of transfer of payment entitlements to the national authorities and the deadlines within which such notification is to take place. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 71(2).
