Article 52
General rules
1.   Member States may grant coupled support to farmers under the conditions laid down in this Chapter (in this Chapter referred to as "coupled support").
2.   Coupled support may be granted to the following sectors and productions: cereals, oilseeds, protein crops, grain legumes, flax, hemp, rice, nuts, starch potato, milk and milk products, seeds, sheepmeat and goatmeat, beef and veal, olive oil, silkworms, dried fodder, hops, sugar beet, cane and chicory, fruit and vegetables and short rotation coppice.
3.   Coupled support may only be granted to those sectors or to those regions of a Member State where specific types of farming or specific agricultural sectors that are particularly important for economic, social or environmental reasons undergo certain difficulties.
4.   By way of derogation from paragraph 3, coupled support may also be granted to farmers who:
(a)
on 31 December 2014, have payment entitlements granted in accordance with Section 2 of Chapter 3 of Title III and Article 71m of Regulation (EC) No 1782/2003 and in accordance with Article 60 and the fourth paragraph of Article 65 of Regulation (EC) No 73/2009; and
(b)
have at their disposal no eligible hectares for the activation of payment entitlements under the basic payment scheme as referred to in Chapter 1 of Title III of this Regulation.
5.   Coupled support may only be granted to the extent necessary to create an incentive to maintain current levels of production in the sectors or regions concerned.
6.   Coupled support shall take the form of an annual payment and shall be granted within defined quantitative limits and be based on fixed areas and yields or on a fixed number of animals.
7.   In the case of a legal person, or a group of natural or legal persons, Member States may apply the limits referred to in paragraph 6 at the level of the members of those legal persons or groups where national law provides for the individual members to assume rights and obligations comparable to those of individual farmers who have the status of a head of holding, in particular as regards their economic, social and tax status, provided that they have contributed to strengthening the agricultural structures of the legal persons or groups concerned.
8.   Any coupled support granted under this Article shall be consistent with other Union measures and policies.
9.   In order to ensure efficient and targeted use of Union funds and to avoid double funding under other similar support instruments, the Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 70 laying down:
(a)
the conditions for granting coupled support;
(b)
rules on consistency with other Union measures and on the cumulation of support.
