Article 22
Basic payment scheme ceiling
1.   The Commission shall adopt implementing acts setting, for each Member State, the annual national ceiling for the basic payment scheme by deducting from the annual national ceiling set out in Annex II the ceilings fixed in accordance with Articles 42, 47, 49, 51 and 53. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 71(2).
2.   For each Member State, the amount calculated in accordance with the paragraph 1 of this Article may be increased by a maximum of 3 % of the relevant annual national ceiling set out in Annex II after deduction of the amount resulting from the application of Article 47(1) for the relevant year. When a Member State applies such an increase, that increase shall be taken into account by the Commission when setting the annual national ceiling for the basic payment scheme pursuant to paragraph 1 of this Article. For that purpose, Member States shall notify the Commission by 1 August 2014 of the annual percentages by which the amount calculated pursuant to paragraph 1 of this Article is to be increased.
3.   Member States may review their decision referred to in paragraph 2 on an annual basis and shall notify the Commission of any decision based on such review by 1 August of the year preceding its application.
4.   For each Member State and each year, the total value of all payment entitlements and the national reserve or the regional reserves shall equal the respective annual national ceiling set by the Commission pursuant to paragraph 1.
5.   If the ceiling for a Member State set by the Commission pursuant to paragraph 1 is different from that of the previous year as a result of any decision taken by that Member State in accordance with paragraph 3 of this Article, the third and fourth subparagraphs of Article 14(1), the third and fourth subparagraphs of Article 14(2), Article 42(1), the second subparagraph of Article 49(1), the second subparagraph of Article 51(1), or Article 53, that Member State shall linearly reduce or increase the value of all payment entitlements in order to ensure compliance with paragraph 4 of this Article.
