Article 63
Amount of the payment
1.   Member States shall set the amount of the annual payment for each farmer participating in the small farmers scheme at one of the following levels:
(a)
an amount not exceeding 25 % of the national average payment per beneficiary, which shall be established by the Member States on the basis of the national ceiling set out in Annex II for calendar year 2019 and the number of farmers who have declared eligible hectares, pursuant to Article 33(1) or Article 36(2), in 2015;
(b)
an amount corresponding to the national average payment per hectare multiplied by a figure corresponding to a number of hectares not exceeding five, to be set by the Member States. The national average payment per hectare shall be established by the Member States on the basis of the national ceiling set out in Annex II for calendar year 2019 and the number of eligible hectares declared in accordance with Article 33(1) or Article 36(2) in 2015.
The amount referred to in points (a) or (b) of the first subparagraph shall not be lower than EUR 500 and shall not be higher than EUR 1 250.
Where the application of points (a) and (b) of the first subparagraph results in an amount lower than EUR 500 or higher than EUR 1 250, the amount shall be rounded up or down, respectively, to that minimum or maximum amount.
2.   By way of derogation from paragraph 1, a Member State may decide to grant participating farmers:
(a)
an amount equal to the total value of the payments to be allocated to the farmer each year under Titles III and IV; or
(b)
an amount equal to the total value of the payments to be allocated to the farmer in 2015 under Titles III and IV, that the Member State may adjust in subsequent years to proportionately take into account the changes in the national ceiling set out in Annex II.
The amount referred to in point (a) or (b) of the first subparagraph shall not be higher than an amount fixed by that Member State which shall be between EUR 500 and EUR 1 250.
Where the application of point (a) or (b) of the first subparagraph results in an amount lower than EUR 500, the Member State concerned may decide to round up this amount to EUR 500.
3.   By way of derogation from paragraphs 1 and 2, in Cyprus, Croatia, Malta and Slovenia, the amount referred to in those paragraphs may be set at a value lower than EUR 500, but not less than EUR 200 or, in the case of Malta, not less than EUR 50.
