Article 65
Financial provisions
1.   In order to finance the payment referred to in this Title, Member States shall deduct from the total amounts available for the respective payments the amounts to which the small farmers would be entitled:
(a)
under the basic payment scheme or the single area payment scheme referred to in Chapter 1 of Title III;
(b)
as a redistributive payment referred to in Chapter 2 of Title III;
(c)
as a payment for agricultural practices beneficial for the climate and the environment referred to in Chapter 3 of Title III;
(d)
as a payment for areas with natural constraints referred to in Chapter 4 of Title III;
(e)
as a payment for young farmers referred to in Chapter 5 of Title III; and
(f)
as coupled support referred to in Title IV.
In the case of Member States having opted to calculate the amount of the payment pursuant to point (a) of the first subparagraph of Article 63(2), where the sum of those amounts for an individual farmer exceeds the maximum amount that they have fixed, each amount shall be proportionately reduced.
2.   The difference between the sum of all payments due under the small farmers scheme and the total amount financed in accordance with paragraph 1 shall be financed in one or more of the following ways:
(a)
by applying Article 30(7) in the relevant year;
(b)
by using the funds for financing the payment for young farmers laid down in Chapter 5 of Title III which are left unused in the relevant year;
(c)
by applying a linear reduction to all payments to be granted in accordance with Articles 32 or 36.
3.   Except where a Member State has opted to set the amount of the annual payment pursuant to point (a) of the first subparagraph of Article 63(2), the elements on the basis of which the amounts referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article are established shall remain the same for the entire duration of the participation of the farmer in the small farmers scheme.
4.   If the total amount of payments due under the small farmers scheme exceeds 10 % of the annual national ceiling set out in Annex II, Member States shall apply a linear reduction to the amounts to be paid in accordance with this Title in order to respect that percentage, unless they have set the amount of the payment in accordance with point (a) of the first subparagraph of Article 63(2) without applying the third subparagraph of Article 63(2).
The same exception applies for Member States which have set the amount of the payment in accordance with point (b) of the first subparagraph of Article 63(2) without applying the third subparagraph of Article 63(2), whose national ceiling set out in Annex II for year 2019 is higher than for year 2015 and which apply the calculation method set out in Article 25(1) or in Article 36(2).
