Whereas:
(1)
The Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions entitled "The CAP towards 2020: Meeting the food, natural resources and territorial challenges of the future" set out potential challenges, objectives and orientations for the Common Agricultural Policy ("the CAP") after 2013. In the light of the debate on that Communication, the CAP should be reformed with effect from 1 January 2014. That reform should cover all the main instruments of the CAP, including Council Regulation (EC) No 73/2009 (5). In view of the scope of the reform, it is appropriate to repeal Regulation (EC) No 73/2009 and to replace it with a new text. The reform should also streamline and simplify the relevant provisions.
(2)
One of the core objectives, and one of the key requirements, of the CAP reform is the reduction of the administrative burden. This should be taken firmly into account when shaping the relevant provisions for the direct support scheme.
(3)
All the basic elements pertaining to the payment of Union support to farmers should be included in this Regulation, which should also fix the conditions of access to payments which are inextricably linked to those basic elements.
(4)
It is necessary to clarify that Regulation (EU) No 1306/2013 of the European Parliament and of Council (6) and the provisions adopted pursuant to it are to apply in relation to the measures set out in this Regulation. For the sake of consistency with other legal instruments relating to the CAP, some rules currently provided for in Regulation (EC) No 73/2009 are now laid down in Regulation (EU) No 1306/2013, in particular the rules to guarantee compliance with the obligations laid down by direct payment provisions, including checks and the application of administrative measures and administrative penalties in the case of non-compliance, the rules related to cross-compliance such as the statutory management requirements, the good agricultural and environmental condition, the monitoring and evaluation of relevant measures and the rules related to the payment of advances and the recovery of undue payments.
(5)
In order to supplement or amend certain non-essential elements of this Regulation, the power to adopt acts in accordance with Article 290 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU) should be delegated to the Commission. It is of particular importance that the Commission carry out appropriate consultations during its preparatory work, including at expert level. The Commission, when preparing and drawing-up delegated acts, should ensure a simultaneous, timely and appropriate transmission of relevant documents to the European Parliament and to the Council.
(6)
This Regulation should contain a list of the direct payment support schemes covered by it. In order to take into account new legislation on support schemes which may be adopted after the entry into force of this Regulation, the power to adopt certain acts should be delegated to the Commission in respect of the amendment of that list.
(7)
In order to ensure legal certainty, the power to adopt certain acts should be delegated to the Commission in respect of establishing the framework within which Member States are to define the criteria to be met by farmers in order to fulfil the obligation to maintain the agricultural area in a state suitable for grazing or cultivation, and the minimum activities to be carried out on areas naturally kept in a state suitable for grazing or cultivation, as well as the criteria to determine the predominance of grasses and other herbaceous forage and to determine the established local practices as regards permanent grassland and permanent pasture ('permanent grassland').
(8)
With a view to ensuring that the amounts for the financing of the CAP comply with the annual ceilings referred to in Article 16(1) of Regulation (EU) No 1306/2013, an adjustment of the level of direct support in any calendar year should be made as provided for under Article 25 of that Regulation. In order to ensure that it contributes to achieving the objective of a more balanced distribution of payments between small and large beneficiaries, the adjustment of the direct payments should only be applied to payments to be granted to farmers in excess of EUR 2 000 in the corresponding calendar year. Taking into account the levels of direct payments to farmers in Bulgaria, Croatia and Romania in the framework of the application of the phasing-in mechanism to all direct payments granted in those Member States, this instrument of financial discipline should only apply in Bulgaria and Romania from 1 January 2016, and in Croatia from 1 January 2022. Specific rules should be laid down in respect of that instrument of financial discipline and of certain other provisions in the case of a legal person, or a group of natural or legal persons, where national law provides for individual members' rights and obligations comparable to those of individual farmers who have the status of a head of holding, in order to strengthen the agricultural structures and promote the establishment of the legal persons or groups concerned.
(9)
In order to ensure the correct application of the adjustment of direct payments with respect to financial discipline, the power to adopt certain acts should be delegated to the Commission in respect of rules on the basis for calculation of reductions to be applied by Member States to farmers pursuant to the application of the financial discipline.
(10)
Experience acquired in the application of the various support schemes for farmers has shown that support was in a number of cases granted to natural or legal persons whose business purpose was not, or was only marginally targeted at an agricultural activity. To ensure that support is better targeted, Member States should refrain from granting direct payments to certain natural and legal persons unless such persons can demonstrate that their agricultural activity is not marginal. Member States should also have the possibility of not granting direct payments to other natural or legal persons whose agricultural activity is marginal. However, Member States should be allowed to grant direct payments to smaller part-time farmers, since those farmers contribute directly to the vitality of rural areas. Member States should also refrain from granting direct payments to natural or legal persons whose agricultural areas are mainly areas naturally kept in a state suitable for grazing or cultivation and who do not carry out a certain minimum activity.
(11)
In order to guarantee the protection of the rights of farmers, the power to adopt certain acts should be delegated to the Commission in respect of laying down criteria for determining the cases where a farmer's agricultural area is to be considered to be mainly an area naturally kept in a state suitable for grazing or cultivation, criteria to establish the distinction between receipts resulting from agricultural and from non-agricultural activities and the amount of direct payments relevant for applying the marginality test, and criteria to be met by farmers in order to prove that their agricultural activity is not marginal.
(12)
To avoid the excessive administrative burden caused by managing payments of small amounts, Member States should in general refrain from granting direct payments where the amount would be lower than EUR 100, or where the eligible area of the holding for which support is claimed would be less than one hectare. However, as Member States' farming structures vary considerably and may differ significantly from the average farming structure in the Union, Member States should be allowed to apply minimum thresholds that reflect their particular situation. Due to the very specific farming structure in the outermost regions and the smaller Aegean Islands, Member States should be able to decide whether any minimum threshold should apply in those regions. Moreover, Member States should opt for the implementation of one of the two types of minimum threshold, taking account of the particularities of the structures of their farming sectors. Since payment could be granted to farmers with so-called 'landless' holdings, the application of the hectare-based threshold would be ineffective. The support-related minimum amount should therefore apply to such farmers. To ensure the equal treatment of farmers in Bulgaria, Croatia and Romania whose direct payments are subject to phasing-in, the minimum threshold should, in those Member States, be based on the final amounts to be granted at the end of the phasing-in process.
(13)
The distribution of direct income support among farmers is characterised by the allocation of disproportionate amounts of payments to a rather small number of large beneficiaries. Larger beneficiaries, due to their ability to exploit economies of size, do not require the same level of unitary support in order for the objective of income support to be efficiently achieved. Moreover, the potential to adapt makes it easier for larger beneficiaries to operate with lower levels of unitary support. Member States should therefore reduce by at least 5 % the part of the basic payment to be granted to farmers which exceeds EUR 150 000. To avoid disproportionate effects on large farms with high employment numbers, Member States may decide to take into account salaried labour intensity when applying the mechanism. In order to make such reduction of the support level effective, no advantage should be granted to farmers who artificially create the conditions to avoid its effects. The proceeds of the reduction of payments to large beneficiaries should remain in the Member States where they were generated and should be made available as Union support for measures financed under the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development (EAFRD).
(14)
Net ceilings should be determined for each Member State in order to limit the payments to be made to farmers following the application of the reduction of payments. To take into account the specific characteristics of CAP support granted in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 228/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council (7) and Regulation (EU) No 229/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council (8), and the fact that these direct payments are not subject to reduction of payments, the net ceiling for the Member States concerned should not include those direct payments.
(15)
In order to take account of the developments relating to the total maximum amounts of direct payments that may be granted, including those resulting from the decisions to be taken by the Member States regarding transfers between the first and second pillars and the application of the reduction and, where applicable, capping of payments, as well as those resulting from the notifications to be made by Croatia regarding the de-mined land that has returned to use for agricultural activities, the power to adopt certain acts should be delegated to the Commission in respect of adapting the national and net ceilings set out in this Regulation.
(16)
It should be specified that those provisions of this Regulation which could give rise to behaviour of a Member State capable of constituting State aid are excluded from the application of the State aid rules, given that the provisions concerned include appropriate conditions for the granting of support, or envisage the adoption of such conditions by the Commission, in order to prevent any undue distortion of competition.
(17)
With a view to strengthening their rural development policy, Member States should be given the possibility to transfer funds from their direct payments ceiling to their support assigned for rural development. Member States should also be given the possibility to transfer funds from their support assigned for rural development to their direct payments ceiling. To ensure the effectiveness of this tool, Member States should be given the possibility to review their initial decision once, with effect from claim year 2018, provided that any decision based on such review does not entail any decrease in the amounts assigned for rural development.
(18)
In order to achieve the objectives of the CAP, the support schemes may need to be adapted to changing developments, if necessary within short time-limits. Therefore, it is necessary to provide for a possible review of the support schemes, in particular in the light of economic developments or the budgetary situation, with the result that beneficiaries cannot assume that support conditions remain unchanged.
(19)
Farmers in Member States which acceded to the Union on or after 1 May 2004 received direct payments following a phasing-in mechanism provided for in the respective Acts of Accession. For Bulgaria and Romania, such mechanism will still be in force in 2015, and for Croatia, it will be in force until 2021. Furthermore, those Member States were allowed to grant complementary national direct payments. The possibility for granting such payments should be maintained for Croatia and, as a complement to the basic payment scheme for Bulgaria and Romania, until they are fully phased-in. As regards authorising Croatia to grant complementary national direct payments, the Commission should be empowered to adopt implementing acts without applying Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council (9).
(20)
Regulation (EC) No 73/2009, as amended by the Act of Accession of 2011, provides for a special national de-mining reserve for Croatia in order to finance, for a period of ten years after its accession to the Union, the allocation of payment entitlements to land which is de-mined and returned to agricultural use every year. It is appropriate to set the rules for determining the amounts allotted to funding support for that land under the support schemes provided for in this Regulation and the rules for the management of that reserve. In order to take account of the amounts resulting from the notifications to be made by Croatia regarding the de-mined land that has returned to use for agricultural activities, the power to adopt certain acts should be delegated to the Commission in respect of reviewing certain financial provisions applying to Croatia.
(21)
In order to ensure a better distribution of support across agricultural land in the Union, including in those Member States which applied the single area payment scheme established under Regulation (EC) No 73/2009, a new basic payment scheme should replace the single payment scheme established under Council Regulation (EC) No 1782/2003 (10), and continued under Regulation (EC) No 73/2009, which combined previously existing support mechanisms in a single scheme of decoupled direct payments. Such a move should, in principle, result in the expiry of payment entitlements obtained under those Regulations and the allocation of new ones. That allocation of new payment entitlements should be based, as a general rule, on the number of eligible hectares at the disposal of farmers in the first year of implementation of the scheme. However, Member States which currently operate the single payment scheme on a regional or regional hybrid basis should have the possibility of keeping their existing payment entitlements. In order to avoid a situation in a given Member State in which an increase in the eligible area dilutes disproportionately the amount of direct payments per hectare and thus affects the internal convergence process, Member States should be allowed, when carrying out the first allocation of payment entitlements, to apply certain limitations for the purpose of establishing the number of payment entitlements.
(22)
Due to the successive integration of various sectors into the single payment scheme and the subsequent period of adjustment granted to farmers, it has become increasingly difficult to justify the existence of significant individual differences in the level of support per hectare resulting from use of historical references. Therefore, direct income support should be more equitably distributed between Member States, by reducing the link to historical references and having regard to the overall context of the Union budget. To ensure a more equal distribution of direct support, while taking account of the differences that still exist in wage levels and input costs, the levels of direct support per hectare should be progressively adjusted. Member States that have direct payments below the level of 90 % of the Union average should close one third of the gap between their current level and this level, with all Member States arriving at a minimum level by financial year 2020. This convergence should be financed proportionally by all Member States that have direct payment levels above the Union average level.
(23)
In addition, as a general rule, all payment entitlements activated in 2019 in a Member State or in a region should have a uniform unit value. However, in order to avoid disruptive financial consequences for farmers, Member States should be allowed to take historical factors into account when calculating the value of payment entitlements which farmers should have in 2019, provided that no payment entitlements in 2019 have a value lower than 60 % of the average. Member States should finance this convergence by reducing, on the basis of objective and non-discriminative criteria which they are to establish, the value of payment entitlements that exceeds the 2019 average. In this context and in order to avoid unacceptably disruptive losses for certain farmers, Member States may limit this reduction to 30 % of the initial value of the concerned entitlements, even if such a limitation does not allow for all payment entitlements to reach 60 % of the average value for 2019. Except for those Member States that opt for a uniform unit value from the first year of implementation of the scheme, the convergence should be made in equal steps. The convergence of the payment entitlements with a value above the average should also take account of the estimated resources available for payment entitlements. However, for those Member States which keep their existing payment entitlements and which have already opted for convergence steps in accordance with Article 63(3) of Regulation (EC) No 1782/2003, those convergence steps should be implemented, where applicable, and the value of all payment entitlements should be adjusted to take account of the estimated resources available for payment entitlements.
(24)
The experience gained through applying the single payment scheme has shown that some of its main elements should be kept, including the determination of national ceilings to ensure that the total level of support does not exceed current budgetary constraints. Member States should also continue to operate a national reserve, or should be allowed to establish regional reserves. Such national or regional reserves should be used, as a matter of priority, to facilitate the participation of young farmers and farmers commencing their agricultural activity in the scheme and using them should be allowed in order to take account of certain other specific situations. Rules on the transfer and use of payment entitlements should be retained.
(25)
The experience gained through applying Regulation (EC) No 73/2009 has shown that Member States did not use the entire amount of the funds available under the national ceilings laid down in that Regulation. While, compared to the system under that Regulation, this Regulation reduces the risk of unspent funds Member States should nonetheless have the possibility of distributing payment entitlements for a higher value than the amount available for their basic payment scheme, in order to facilitate a more efficient use of the funds. Member States should therefore be allowed, within certain common limits and in respect of the net ceilings for direct payments, to calculate the necessary amount by which their basic payment ceiling may be increased.
(26)
As a general rule, any agricultural area of the holding, including areas that were not in good agricultural condition on 30 June 2003 in Member States acceding to the Union on 1 May 2004 that opted to apply the single area payment scheme, that is used for an agricultural activity is eligible to benefit from the basic payment. Given the potential for non-agricultural activities to contribute to the income diversification of agricultural holdings and to the vitality of rural areas, an agricultural area of a holding that is used also for non-agricultural activities is to be considered eligible on condition that it is used predominantly for agricultural activities. For the purpose of assessing that predominance, common criteria should be set for all Member States. In this context and in order to ensure better targeting of direct payments, it should be possible for Member States to draw up, in the interests of legal certainty and clarity, a list of areas which are predominantly used for non-agricultural activities and are hence ineligible. Furthermore, in order to maintain the eligibility of land that was eligible for the purpose of activating set-aside entitlements prior to the abolition of the set-aside obligation, it should be provided that certain afforested areas, including those afforested under national schemes complying with the relevant rules in Council Regulation (EC) No 1698/2005 (11) or Regulation (EU) No 1305/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council (12), or areas subject to certain environmental commitments, are eligible to benefit from the basic payment.
(27)
In order to avoid a situation in which, in a given Member State, an increase in the eligible area dilutes disproportionately the amount of direct payments per hectare and thus affects the internal convergence process, Member States should be allowed to use a reduction coefficient for determining the eligible area of permanent grassland where grasses and other herbaceous forage are traditionally not predominant in grazing areas, but form part of established local practices.
(28)
As regards hemp, specific measures should be kept to ensure that illegal crops cannot be hidden among the crops eligible for the basic payment, thereby adversely affecting the market for hemp. Hence, payments should continue to be granted only for areas sown with varieties of hemp offering certain guarantees with regard to its psychotropic substance content.
(29)
In order to ensure legal certainty, and in order to clarify the specific situations that may arise in the application of the basic payment scheme, the power to adopt certain acts should be delegated to the Commission in respect of rules on eligibility and access in respect of the basic payment scheme of farmers, in the case of inheritance and anticipated inheritance, inheritance under a lease, change of legal status or denomination, transfer of payment entitlements, and in the case of a merger or scission of the holding and in the case of a contract clause regarding the right to receive payment entitlements in the first year of allocation of payment entitlements. Moreover, that delegation of power should also cover rules on the calculation of the value and number or on the change in the value of payment entitlements in relation to the allocation of payment entitlements, including rules on the possibility of a provisional value and number or of a provisional increase of payment entitlements allocated on the basis of the application from the farmer, on the conditions for establishing the provisional and definitive value and number of the payment entitlements and on the cases where a sale or lease contract could affect the allocation of payment entitlements. Furthermore, that delegation of power should also cover rules on the establishment and calculation of the value and number of payment entitlements received from the national reserve or regional reserves; rules on the modification of the unit value of payment entitlements in the case of fractions of payment entitlements and the transfer of payment entitlements without land. In addition, that delegation of power should also cover criteria for the allocation of payment entitlements to farmers who did not receive direct payments in 2013 or pursuant to the use of the national or regional reserve; criteria for applying limitations on the number of payment entitlements to be allocated; and criteria for setting the reduction coefficient for conversion of certain permanent grassland to eligible hectares.
(30)
In order to ensure the proper management of payment entitlements, the power to adopt certain acts should be delegated to the Commission in respect of rules on the content of the declaration and the requirements for the activation of payment entitlements.
(31)
In order to preserve public health, the power to adopt certain acts should be delegated to the Commission in respect of laying down rules making the granting of payments conditional upon the use of certified seeds of certain hemp varieties and defining the procedure for the determination of hemp varieties and the verification of their tetrahydrocannabinol content.
(32)
In view of the considerable administrative, technical and logistical difficulties the transition to the basic payment scheme represents for the Member States applying the single area payment scheme under Regulation (EC) No 73/2009, they should be allowed to apply the single area payment scheme for the purpose of granting the basic payment for a further transitional period until the end of 2020 at the latest. If a Member State decides to introduce the basic payment scheme by 2018, it may opt for differentiating the payments under the single area payment scheme according to the level of certain payments granted in 2014 under the regimes for specific support and separate payments provided for in Regulation (EC) No 73/2009, or, in the case of Cyprus, under the sector-specific financial envelopes for transitional national aid.
(33)
In order to guarantee the protection of the rights of beneficiaries and in order to clarify the specific situations that may arise in the application of the single area payment scheme, the power to adopt certain acts should be delegated to the Commission in respect of laying down rules on eligibility and access in respect of the single area payment scheme of farmers.
(34)
In Member States applying the single area payment scheme which were allowed to grant transitional national aid, such aid has played an important role in supporting the income of farmers in specific sectors. For that reason, and in order to avoid a sudden and substantial decrease of support from 2015 in those sectors benefiting, until 2014, from transitional national aid, it is appropriate to provide, in those Member States, for the possibility to grant that aid as a complement to the single area payment scheme. In order to ensure the continuity of the support with the transitional national aid granted so far, it is appropriate to limit the conditions to those applicable in 2013 to that aid, or in the case of Bulgaria and Romania to complementary national direct payments, authorised by the Commission following the requests from Member States. It is also appropriate to limit the maximum amounts of aid by sector, compared to their levels in 2013, to ensure a steady decrease of the aid levels and to ensure their compatibility with the convergence mechanism.
(35)
Specific rules should be provided for the first allocation and for the calculation of the value of payment entitlements when Member States having applied the single area payment scheme pursuant to this Regulation introduce the basic payment scheme. In order to ensure a smooth transition between those schemes, the power to adopt certain acts should be delegated to the Commission in respect of further rules on the introduction of the basic payment scheme in Member States having applied the single area payment scheme.
(36)
Taking into account the need for the unitary support to farmers with smaller holdings to be sufficient in order to achieve the objective of income support effectively, Member States should be allowed to redistribute direct support between farmers by granting them an extra payment for the first hectares.
(37)
One of the objectives of the new CAP is the enhancement of environmental performance through a mandatory "greening" component of direct payments which will support agricultural practices beneficial for the climate and the environment applicable throughout the Union. For that purpose, Member States should use part of their national ceilings for direct payments in order to grant, on top of the basic payment, an annual payment which may take account of internal convergence in the Member State or region, for compulsory practices to be followed by farmers addressing, as a priority, both climate and environment policy goals. Those practices should take the form of simple, generalised, non-contractual and annual actions that go beyond cross-compliance and that are linked to agriculture, such as crop diversification, the maintenance of permanent grassland, including traditional orchards where fruit trees are grown in low density on grassland, and the establishment of ecological focus areas. In order to better achieve the objectives of "greening" and to allow for its efficient administration and control, such practices should apply to the whole eligible area of the holding. The compulsory nature of those practices should also concern farmers whose holdings are fully or partly situated in "Natura 2000" areas covered by Council Directive 92/43/EEC (13) and by Directive 2009/147/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (14), or in areas covered by Directive 2000/60/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (15), as long as those practices are compatible with the objectives of those Directives.
(38)
Given the recognised environmental benefits of the organic farming systems, farmers should, for those units of their holding on which they fulfil the conditions laid down in Council Regulation (EC) No 834/2007 (16), benefit from the "greening" component without needing to fulfil any further obligation.
(39)
Failure to respect the "greening" component should lead to penalties on the basis of Regulation (EU) No 1306/2013.
(40)
In order to accommodate the diversity of agricultural systems and the different environmental situations across the Union, it is justified to recognise, in addition to the three greening practices established in this Regulation, practices covered by agri-environment-climate measures or certification schemes that are similar to greening and that yield an equivalent or higher level of benefit for the climate and the environment. For reasons of legal clarity these practices should be laid down in an Annex to this Regulation. Member States should decide whether to offer to farmers the possibility of using equivalent practices and the greening practices established in this Regulation in order to require the farmer to observe the practices best suited to ensure the objectives of the measure and they should notify the Commission of their decisions. For reasons of legal certainty, the Commission should assess whether the practices covered by the notified equivalent measures are covered by the Annex. If the Commission considers this not to be the case, it should notify Member States accordingly by means of an implementing act adopted without applying Regulation (EU) No 182/2011. In order to allow a simpler implementation of equivalence and for reasons of controllability, rules should be laid down as regards the area coverage of equivalent measures, taking into account the specific characteristics of agri-environment-climate measures and certification schemes. In order to ensure that equivalent practices are properly applied and that double funding is avoided, the power to adopt certain acts should be delegated to the Commission for the purpose of adding practices to the list of equivalent practices, establishing requirements for the national or regional certification schemes and, where necessary, establishing detailed rules for the calculation of related amounts.
(41)
The obligations relating to crop diversification should be applied in a way that takes into account the difficulty for smaller farms to diversify, while continuing to make progress towards enhanced environmental benefit, and in particular the improvement of soil quality. Exceptions should be provided for farms that already fulfil the objectives of crop diversification as a result of being covered to a significant extent by grassland or fallowland, for specialised farms rotating their parcels each year or for farms that because of their geographical localisation would have excessive difficulties in introducing a third crop. In order to ensure that the obligations referred to in the crop diversification measure are applied in a proportionate and non-discriminatory way and lead to an enhanced environmental protection, the power to adopt certain acts should be delegated to the Commission in respect of recognising further genera and species and laying down rules concerning the application of the precise calculation of shares of different crops.
(42)
For the sake of the environmental benefits of permanent grassland and in particular carbon sequestration, provision should be made for the maintenance of permanent grassland. This protection should consist of a ban on ploughing and conversion on the environmentally most sensitive areas in "Natura 2000" areas covered by Directives 92/43/EEC and 2009/147/EC, and of a more general safeguard, based on a ratio of permanent grassland, against conversion to other uses. Member States should be empowered to delineate further environmentally sensitive areas not covered by those Directives. In addition, they should choose at which territorial level the ratio should apply. In order to assure an efficient protection of permanent grassland, the power to adopt certain acts should be delegated to the Commission for the purpose of defining the framework for the designation, by Member States, of permanent grasslands not covered by Directives 92/43/EEC or 2009/147/EC.
(43)
In order to ensure that the ratio of permanent grassland to the total agricultural area is correctly determined and maintained, the power to adopt certain acts should be delegated to the Commission in respect of the establishment of detailed methods for the determination of that ratio, detailed rules on maintenance of permanent grassland and the relevant time frame for an obligation upon individual farmers to reconvert land.
(44)
Ecological focus areas should be established, in particular, in order to safeguard and improve biodiversity on farms. The ecological focus area should therefore consist of areas directly affecting biodiversity such as land lying fallow, landscape features, terraces, buffer strips, afforested areas and agro-forestry areas, or indirectly affecting biodiversity through a reduced use of inputs on the farm, such as areas covered by catch crops and winter green cover. The obligations laid down in respect of the ecological focus area should be applied in a way that avoids putting a disproportionate burden on smaller farms in comparison to the additional enhanced environmental benefit. Exceptions should be provided for farms that already fulfil the objectives of ecological focus areas by being covered to a significant extent by grassland or fallowland. Exceptions should also be provided, in the case of predominantly forested Member States, for farmers that pursue an agricultural activity in areas facing natural constraints in certain predominantly forested areas where there is a significant risk of land abandonment. In addition, provision should be made for the possibility for Member States and farmers to implement at a regional or collective level the obligation in order to obtain adjacent ecological focus areas that are more beneficial for the environment. For the sake of simplification, Member States should have the option to standardise the measurement of the ecological focus areas.
(45)
In order to ensure the that ecological focus areas are established in an efficient and coherent way, while taking into account Member States' specific characteristics, the power to adopt certain acts should be delegated to the Commission in respect of laying down further criteria for the qualification of areas as ecological focus areas; recognising other types of ecological focus areas; establishing conversion and weighting factors for certain types of ecological focus area; establishing rules for the implementation, by Member States, of a part of the ecological focus area at regional level; laying down rules for collective implementation of the obligation to keep ecological focus areas by holdings in close proximity; establishing the framework for the criteria, to be defined by Member States, for identifying such close proximity; and establishing the methods of determination of the ratio of forest to agricultural land. When adding other types of ecological focus area, the Commission should ensure that they aim to improve the general environmental performance of the holding, in particular as regards biodiversity, the improvement of soil and water quality, the preservation of landscape and meeting the climate change mitigation and adaptation objectives.
(46)
In order to promote the sustainable development of agriculture in areas with specific natural constraints, Member States should be able to use part of their direct payments ceilings to grant an annual area-based payment, on top of the basic payment, to all farmers operating in those areas or in some of those areas, where decided by the Member State. That payment should not replace the support given under rural development programmes and should not be granted to farmers in areas which were designated in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 1698/2005 but have not been designated in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 1305/2013.
(47)
The creation and development of new economic activity in the agricultural sector by young farmers is financially challenging and constitutes an element that should be considered in the allocation and targeting of direct payments. This development is essential for the competitiveness of the agricultural sector in the Union and, for that reason, an income support to young farmers commencing their agricultural activities should be established in order to facilitate the initial establishment of young farmers and the structural adjustment of their holdings after the initial setting up. For that purpose, Member States should use part of their national ceilings for direct payments to grant to young farmers an annual payment, on top of the basic payment. Member States should be able to decide on a calculation method for that payment and, if that method implies an obligation to set a limit on the payment per farmer, such a limit is to be set in respect of the general principles of Union law. Since it should only cover the initial period of the life of the business and should not become an operating aid, that payment should only be granted during a maximum period of five years. It should be available to young farmers commencing their agricultural activity who are no more than 40 years of age in the year of the first submission of the application under the basic payment scheme or under the single area payment scheme.
(48)
In order to guarantee the protection of the rights of beneficiaries and to avoid discrimination between them, the power to adopt certain acts should be delegated to the Commission in respect of defining the conditions under which a legal person may be considered eligible for receiving the payment for young farmers.
(49)
Member States should be allowed to use part of their national ceilings for direct payments for coupled support in certain sectors or regions in clearly defined cases. The resources that may be used for any coupled support should be limited to an appropriate level, while allowing such support to be granted in Member States in their specific sectors or regions facing particular situations where specific types of farming or specific agricultural sectors are particularly important for economic, environmental and/or social reasons. Member States should be allowed to use up to 8 % of their national ceilings for this support, or 13 % where their level of coupled support exceeds 5 % in at least one of the years of the period 2010-2014 or where they apply the single area payment scheme until 31 December 2014. Furthermore, in order to maintain the protein-based autonomy of the breeding sector, Member States which decide to use at least 2 % of their national ceilings to support the production of protein crops should be allowed to increase those percentages by up to two percentage points. In duly justified cases where certain sensitive needs in a sector or a region are demonstrated, and upon approval by the Commission, Member States should be allowed to use more than 13 % of their national ceiling. As an alternative to those percentages, Member States may choose to use up to EUR 3 million per year for financing the coupled support. Coupled support should only be granted to the extent necessary to create an incentive to maintain current levels of production in the sectors or regions concerned. That support should also be available to farmers holding, on31 December 2013, special payment entitlements allocated under Regulation (EC) No 1782/2003 and Regulation (EC) No 73/2009, and who do not have eligible hectares for the activation of payment entitlements. As regards the approval of voluntary coupled support exceeding 13 % of the annual national ceiling fixed per Member State, the Commission should be further empowered to adopt implementing acts without applying Regulation (EU) No 182/2011.
(50)
In order to ensure efficient and targeted use of Union funds and to avoid double funding under other similar support instruments, the power to adopt certain acts should be delegated to the Commission in respect of establishing the conditions for granting voluntary coupled support, as well as rules on its consistency with other Union measures and on the cumulation of support.
(51)
In order to ensure against any risk of disruption to production in the cotton producing regions, a part of support to the cotton sector under Regulation (EC) No 73/2009 continued to be linked to the cultivation of cotton through a crop-specific payment per eligible hectare, taking into account all relevant factors. This situation should be maintained in accordance with the objectives set out in Protocol No 4 on cotton attached to the 1979 Act of Accession.
(52)
In order to ensure the efficient application and management of the crop-specific payment for cotton, the power to adopt certain acts should be delegated to the Commission in respect of establishing rules and conditions for the authorisation of land and varieties for the purposes of the crop-specific payment for cotton; rules on the conditions for the granting of that payment, on the eligibility requirements and the agronomic practices; criteria for the approval of interbranch organisations; obligations for producers; and rules governing the situation where the approved interbranch organisation does not satisfy those criteria.
(53)
Chapter 2 of Council Regulation (EC) No 637/2008 (17) required each cotton producing Member State to submit to the Commission either every four years and for the first time by 1 January 2009 a draft four-year restructuring programme, or by 31 December 2009 a single draft modified eight-year restructuring programme. Experience has shown that the restructuring of the cotton sector would be better served through other measures, including those under rural development programming financed under Regulation (EU) No 1305/2013. Such measures would also allow for a greater co-ordination with measures in other sectors. The acquired rights and legitimate expectations of undertakings already involved in restructuring programmes should, however, be respected. Therefore, the ongoing programmes of four or eight years should be allowed to run their course, with no possiblity of extension. Funds available from the four-year programmes could then be integrated into the available Union funds for measures under rural development from 2014. Given the programming period, funds available after the end of the eight-year programmes would not be useful in rural development programmes in 2018, and could therefore be more usefully transferred to support schemes under this Regulation, as already provided for in Regulation (EC) No 637/2008. Regulation (EC) No 637/2008 will therefore become obsolete from 1 January 2014 or 1 January 2018 as regards Member States which have, respectively, four or eight-year programmes and should therefore be repealed.
(54)
Member States should be allowed to establish a simple and specific scheme for small farmers in order to reduce the administrative costs linked to the management and control of direct support. For that purpose, Member States should be allowed to establish either a lump-sum payment that replaces all direct payments, or a payment based on the amount due to the farmers each year. Rules simplifying formalities should be introduced by reducing, inter alia, the obligations imposed on small farmers, such as those related to the application for support, to agricultural practices beneficial for the climate and the environment, to cross-compliance and to controls as laid down in Regulation (EU) No 1306/2013 without jeopardising the achievement of the overall objectives of the reform, it being understood that Union legislation as referred to in Annex II to Regulation (EU) No 1306/2013 applies to small farmers. The objective of that scheme should be to support the existing agricultural structure of small farms in the Union without countering the development towards more competitive structures. For that reason, access to the scheme should, in principle, be limited to existing holdings. Participation of farmers in the scheme should be optional. However, in order to further increase the impact of the scheme in terms of simplification, Member States should be allowed to include certain farmers in the scheme automatically, subject to the possibility for them to opt-out.
(55)
In order to ensure legal certainty, the power to adopt certain acts should be delegated to the Commission in respect of establishing conditions for participation in the small farmers scheme if the situation of the participating farmer changes.
(56)
In the interest of simplification and in order to take into account the specific situation of the outermost regions, direct payments in those regions should be managed within the support programmes established by Regulation (EU) No 228/2013. As a consequence, provisions in this Regulation relating to the basic payment and related payments, to coupled support and to the small farmers scheme should not apply to those regions.
(57)
Notifications are needed from Member States for the purpose of applying this Regulation, and for the purpose of monitoring, analysing and managing direct payments. In order to ensure the correct application of the rules set out in this Regulation and to make such notifications fast, efficient, accurate, cost-effective and compatible with the protection of personal data, the power to adopt certain acts should be delegated to the Commission in respect of establishing the necessary measures regarding notifications to be made by Member States to the Commission or for the purpose of checking, controlling, monitoring, evaluating and auditing direct payments and for complying with requirements laid down in international agreements, including notification requirements under those agreements and in respect of further rules on the nature and type of the information to be notified, the categories of data to be processed and maximum period of retention, the access rights to the information or information systems and the conditions of publication of the information.
(58)
Personal data collected for the purposes of the application of direct payments should be processed in a way that is compatible with those purposes. It should also be made anonymous, be aggregated when processed for monitoring or evaluation purposes, and be protected in accordance with Union law concerning the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data, in particular Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (18) and Regulation (EC) No 45/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council (19). Data subjects should be informed of such processing and of their data protection rights.
(59)
The European Data Protection Supervisor was consulted and delivered an opinion on 14 December 2011 (20).
(60)
In order to ensure a smooth transition from the arrangements provided for in Regulation (EC) No 73/2009 to those laid down in this Regulation, the power to adopt certain acts should be delegated to the Commission in respect of establishing the necessary measures to protect any acquired rights and legitimate expectations of farmers.
(61)
In order to ensure uniform conditions for the implementation of this Regulation and to avoid unfair competition or discrimination between farmers, implementing powers should be conferred on the Commission in respect of: setting the amount to be included in the special national de-mining reserve for Croatia; fixing the annual national ceiling for the basic payment scheme; adopting rules on applications for allocation of payment entitlements; adopting measures regarding the reversion of non-activated payment entitlements to the national reserve; adopting modalities of the notification of transfer of payment entitlements to the national authorities and the deadlines within which such notifications are to take place; fixing the annual national ceiling for the single area payment scheme; adopting rules on applications for allocation of payment entitlements submitted in the year of allocation of payment entitlements where Member States change to the basic payment scheme; fixing annual ceilings for the redistributive payment. Those powers should be exercised in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 182/2011.
(62)
In order to ensure uniform conditions for the implementation of this Regulation and to avoid unfair competition or discrimination between farmers, implementing powers should also be conferred on the Commission in respect of: adopting rules on the procedure, including on the timetables for their submission, for the Member States' notifications and the Commission assessment as regards equivalent practices; adopting certain limits within which the obligation to maintain permanent grassland is considered to be being complied with; setting out the annual ceiling for the payment for agricultural practices beneficial for the climate and the environment; setting out the annual ceiling for the payment for areas with natural constraints; setting out the annual ceiling for the payment for young farmers. Those powers should be exercised in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 182/2011.
(63)
In order to ensure uniform conditions for the implementation of this Regulation and to avoid unfair competition or discrimination between farmers, implementing powers should also be conferred on the Commission in respect of: setting out the annual ceilings for the voluntary coupled support; adopting rules on the procedure for the assessment and approval of decisions in the framework of the voluntary coupled support; adopting rules on the authorisation procedure and on the notifications to the producers related to the authorisation of land and varieties for the purposes of the crop-specific payment for cotton; adopting rules on the calculation of the reduction of the amount of the crop-specific payment for cotton; adopting rules concerning general notification requirements and methods; and adopting necessary and justifiable measures to resolve specific problems in an emergency. Those powers should be exercised in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 182/2011.
(64)
In order to solve urgent problems occurring in one or more Member States while ensuring the continuity of the direct payments system, the Commission should adopt immediately applicable implementing acts where, in duly justified cases, extraordinary circumstances affect the granting of support and jeopardise the effective implementation of the payments under the support schemes listed in this Regulation.
(65)
Since the objectives of this Regulation cannot be sufficiently achieved by the Member States but can rather, by reason of the links between this Regulation and the other instruments of the CAP, the disparities between the various rural areas and the limited financial resources of the Member States in an enlarged Union, be better achieved at Union level through the multiannual guarantee of Union financing and by concentrating on clearly identified priorities, the Union may adopt measures, in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity as set out in Article 5 of the Treaty on European Union (TEU). In accordance with the principle of proportionality as set out in that Article, this Regulation does not go beyond what is necessary in order to achieve those objectives.
(66)
Given that Regulation (EC) No 73/2009 is to continue to apply in 2014, this Regulation should apply in general from 1 January 2015. However, the provisions of this Regulation on flexibility between pillars provide for the possibility for Member States to take decisions and notify them to the Commssion by 31 December 2013. In addition, some other provisions of this Regulation require action to be taken in 2014. Those provisions should, therefore, apply from the entry into force of this Regulation.
(67)
Due to the urgency of preparing the smooth implementation of the measures envisaged, this Regulation should enter into force on the day of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union,
HAVE ADOPTED THIS REGULATION:
