Article 39
First allocation of payment entitlements
1.   Payment entitlements shall be allocated to farmers who are entitled to be granted direct payments in accordance with Article 9 of this Regulation provided that:
(a)
they apply for allocation of payment entitlements under the basic payment scheme by a final date for submission of applications to be set in accordance with point (b) of the first subparagraph of Article 78 of Regulation (EU) No 1306/2013 in the first year of implementation of the basic payment scheme, except in case of force majeure or exceptional circumstances; and
(b)
they were entitled to receive payments, before any reduction or exclusion provided for in Chapter 4 of Title II of Regulation (EC) No 73/2009, in respect of an aid application for direct payments, for transitional national aid or for complementary national direct payments in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 73/2009 for 2013.
Member States may allocate payment entitlements to farmers who are entitled to be granted direct payments in accordance with Article 9 of this Regulation, who fulfil the condition provided for in point (a) of the first subparagraph, who did not receive payments for 2013 in respect of an aid application referred to in point (b) of the first subparagraph of this paragraph and who, on the date fixed by the Member State concerned in accordance with Article 11(2) of Regulation (EC) No 1122/2009 for the claim year 2013, had only agricultural land that was not in good agricultural condition on the 30 June 2003, as provided for in Article 124(1) of Regulation (EC) No 73/2009.
2.   Except in the case of force majeure or exceptional circumstances, the number of payment entitlements allocated per farmer in the first year of implementation of the basic payment scheme shall be equal to the number of eligible hectares which the farmer declares in his aid application in accordance with point (a) of the first subparagraph of Article 72(1) of Regulation (EU) No 1306/2013 for the first year of implementation of the basic payment scheme and which are at his disposal on a date fixed by the Member State. That date shall be no later than the date fixed in that Member State for amending such aid application.
3.   The Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 70 laying down further rules on the introduction of the basic payment scheme in Member States having applied the single area payment scheme.
4.   The Commission shall adopt implementing acts laying down rules on applications for the allocation of payment entitlements submitted in the year of allocation of payment entitlements where those payment entitlements may not yet be definitively established and where that allocation is affected by specific circumstances.
Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 71(2).
