Article 23
Regional allocation of the national ceilings
1.   Member States may decide, by 1 August 2014, to apply the basic payment scheme at regional level. In such cases, they shall define the regions in accordance with objective and non-discriminatory criteria such as their agronomic and socio-economic characteristics, their regional agricultural potential, or their institutional or administrative structure.
Member States applying Article 36 may take the decision referred to in the first subparagraph by 1 August of the year preceding the first year of implementation of the basic payment scheme.
2.   Member States shall divide the annual national ceiling for the basic payment scheme referred to in Article 22(1) between the regions in accordance with objective and non-discriminatory criteria.
Member States not applying Article 30(2) shall make that division after applying the linear reduction provided for in Article 30(1).
3.   Member States may decide that the regional ceilings shall be subject to annual progressive modifications in accordance with pre-established annual steps and objective and non-discriminatory criteria such as agricultural potential or environmental criteria.
4.   To the extent necessary to respect the applicable regional ceilings determined in accordance with paragraph 2 or 3, Member States shall make a linear reduction or increase in the value of the payment entitlements in each of the relevant regions.
5.   Member States applying paragraph 1 may decide to cease the application of the basic payment scheme at regional level from a date to be set by them.
6.   Member States applying the first subparagraph of paragraph 1 shall notify the Commission of the decision referred to in that subparagraph and of the measures taken for the application of paragraphs 2 and 3 by 1 August 2014.
Member States applying the second subparagraph of paragraph 1 shall notify the Commission of any decision referred to in that subparagraph and of the measures taken for the application of paragraphs 2 and 3 by 1 August of the relevant year.
Member States applying paragraph 1 shall notify the Commission of any decision referred to in paragraph 5 by 1 August of the year preceding the first year of implementation of that decision.
