Article 40
Value of payment entitlements
1.   In the first year of implementation of the basic payment scheme, Member States shall calculate the unit value of payment entitlements by dividing a fixed percentage of the national ceiling set out in Annex II for each relevant year by the number of payment entitlements in the first year of implementation of the basic payment scheme, excluding those allocated from the national reserve or regional reserves.
The fixed percentage referred to in the first subparagraph shall be calculated by dividing the national or regional ceiling for the basic payment scheme to be set in accordance with, respectively, Article 22(1) or Article 23(2) of this Regulation for the first year of implementation of the basic payment scheme, after applying the linear reduction provided for in paragraph 1 or, where applicable, paragraph 2 of Article 30 by the national ceiling set out in Annex II for the first year of implementation of the basic payment scheme. The payment entitlements shall be expressed in a number that corresponds to a number of hectares.
2.   By way of derogation from the calculation method referred to in paragraph 1, Member States may decide to differentiate the value of payment entitlements in the first year of implementation of the basic payment scheme, excluding those allocated from the national reserve or regional reserves for each relevant year, on the basis of their initial unit value.
3.   The initial unit value of payment entitlements referred to in paragraph 2 shall be set by dividing a fixed percentage of the total value of aid, excluding aid pursuant to Articles 41, 43, 48 and 50 and Title IV of this Regulation, received by a farmer in accordance with this Regulation for the calendar year preceding the implementation of the basic payment scheme, before the application of Article 63 of Regulation (EU) No 1306/2013, by the number of payment entitlements allocated to that farmer in the first year of implementation of the basic payment scheme, excluding those allocated from the national reserve or regional reserves.
That fixed percentage shall be calculated by dividing the national or regional ceiling for the basic payment scheme to be set in accordance with, respectively, Article 22(1) or Article 23(2) of this Regulation for the first year of implementation of the basic payment scheme, after applying the linear reduction provided for in paragraph 1 or, where applicable, paragraph 2 of Article 30, by the total value of aid, excluding aid pursuant to Articles 41, 43, 48 and 50 and Title IV of this Regulation, granted for the calendar year preceding the implementation of the basic payment scheme within the Member State or region concerned, before the application of Article 63 of Regulation (EU) No 1306/2013.
4.   When applying paragraph 2, Member States, acting in compliance with the general principles of Union law, shall move towards approximating the value of the payment entitlements at national or regional level. To this end, Member States shall fix the steps to be taken and the method of calculation to be used and shall notify them to the Commission by 1 August of the year preceding the implementation of the basic payment scheme. Those steps shall include annual progressive modifications of the initial value of payment entitlements referred to in paragraph 3 in accordance with objective and non-discriminatory criteria, starting from the first year of implementation of the basic payment scheme.
In the first year of implementation of the basic payment scheme, Member States shall inform the farmers of the value of their entitlements, calculated in accordance with this Article, for each year of the period covered by this Regulation.
5.   For the purposes of paragraph 3, a Member State may, on the basis of objective criteria, provide that, in cases of sale or grant or expiry of all or part of a lease of agricultural areas after the date fixed pursuant to Article 36(5) and before the date fixed pursuant to Article 33(1), the increase, or a part thereof, in the value of payment entitlements that would be allocated to the farmer concerned is to revert to the national reserve or regional reserves where the increase would lead to a windfall profit for the farmer concerned.
Those objective criteria shall be established in such a way as to ensure the equal treatment of farmers and to avoid distortions of the market and of competition and shall include, at least, the following:
(a)
a minimum duration for the lease;
(b)
the proportion of the payment received which is to revert to the national reserve or regional reserves.
