Article 19
Complementary national direct payments for Croatia
1.   Subject to authorisation by the Commission, Croatia may complement any of the support schemes listed in Annex I, where relevant.
2.   The amount of complementary national direct payments which may be granted in a given year and for a given support scheme shall be limited by a specific financial envelope. This envelope shall be established as the difference between:
(a)
the amount of direct support available per support scheme concerned after the full introduction of direct payments in accordance with Article 17 for the calendar year 2022, and
(b)
the amount of direct support available per support scheme concerned after the application of the schedule of increments in accordance with Article 17 for the calendar year concerned.
3.   The total amount of complementary national direct payments granted shall not be higher than the ceiling set out in point B of Annex VI for a corresponding calendar year.
4.   Croatia may decide, on the basis of objective criteria and after authorisation by the Commission, on the amounts of complementary national direct payments to be granted.
5.   The Commission shall adopt implementing acts authorising the payments under this Article, specifying the relevant support schemes and defining the level up to which the complementary national direct payments may be paid.
As regards complementary national direct payments intended to complement the voluntary coupled support referred to in Chapter 1 of Title IV, the implementing acts shall also specify the specific types of farming or the specific agricultural sectors referred to in Article 52(3) to which the complementary national direct payments may relate.
Those implementing acts shall be adopted without applying the procedure referred to in Article 71(2) or (3).
6.   The eligibility conditions for complementary national direct payments for Croatia shall be identical to those for support under corresponding support schemes as laid down in this Regulation.
7.   Complementary national direct payments for Croatia shall be subject to any adjustments which may be rendered necessary by developments in the CAP. They shall be granted in accordance with objective criteria and in such a way as to ensure equal treatment between farmers and to avoid distortions of the market and of competition.
8.   Croatia shall submit a report providing information on the measures for the implementation of the complementary national direct payments by 30 June of the year following their implementation. The report shall cover at least the following:
(a)
any changes in the situation affecting the complementary national direct payments;
(b)
for each complementary national direct payment, the numbers of beneficiaries and the total amount of complementary national direct payment granted, as well as the hectares and the number of animals or other units for which that complementary national direct payment has been granted;
(c)
a report on control measures applied in relation to the complementary national direct payments granted.
