Article 41
General rules
1.   Member States may decide by 1 August of any given year to grant, from the following year, an annual payment to farmers who are entitled to a payment under the basic payment scheme referred to in Sections 1, 2, 3 and 5 of Chapter 1 or under the single area payment scheme referred to in Section 4 of Chapter 1 ("the redistributive payment").
Member States shall notify the Commission of any such decision by the date referred to in the first subparagraph.
2.   Member States which have decided to apply the basic payment scheme at regional level in accordance with Article 23 may apply the redistributive payment at regional level.
3.   Without prejudice to the application of financial discipline, of reduction of payments in accordance with Article 11, of linear reductions as referred in Article 7 of this Regulation, and to the application of Article 63 of Regulation (EU) No 1306/2013, the redistributive payment shall be granted annually upon activation of payment entitlements by the farmer, or, in Member States applying Article 36 of this Regulation, upon declaration of eligible hectares by the farmer.
4.   The redistributive payment shall be calculated each year by Member States by multiplying a figure to be set by the Member State, which shall not be higher than 65 % of the national or regional average payment per hectare, by the number of payment entitlements activated by the farmer in accordance with Article 33(1) or by the number of eligible hectares declared by the farmer in accordance with Article 36(2). The number of such payment entitlements or hectares shall not exceed a maximum to be set by Member States which shall not be higher than 30 hectares or the average size of agricultural holdings set out in Annex VIII if that average size exceeds 30 hectares in the Member State concerned.
5.   Provided that the maximum limits set out in paragraph 4 are respected, Member States may, at national level, establish a graduation in the number of hectares set in accordance with that paragraph, which shall apply identically to all farmers.
6.   The national average payment per hectare referred to in paragraph 4 of this Article shall be established by the Member States on the basis of the national ceiling set out in Annex II for calendar year 2019 and the number of eligible hectares declared in accordance with Article 33(1) or Article 36(2) in 2015.
The regional average payment per hectare referred to in paragraph 4 of this Article shall be established by the Member States by using a share of the national ceiling set out in Annex II for calendar year 2019 and the number of eligible hectares declared in the region concerned in accordance with Article 33(1) in 2015. For each region, this share shall be calculated by dividing the respective regional ceiling set in accordance with Article 23(2) by the national ceiling set in accordance with Article 22(1), after applying the linear reduction provided for in paragraph 1 of Article 30 where paragraph 2 of that Article is not applied.
7.   Member States shall ensure that no advantage provided for under this Chapter is granted to farmers in respect of whom it is established that, after 18 October 2011, they divided their holding with the sole purpose of benefiting from the redistributive payment. This shall also apply to farmers whose holdings result from that division.
8.   In the case of a legal person, or a group of natural or legal persons, Member States may apply the maximum number of payment entitlements or hectares referred to in paragraph 4 at the level of the members of those legal persons or groups where national law provides for the individual members to assume rights and obligations comparable to those of individual farmers who have the status of a head of holding, in particular as regards their economic, social and tax status, provided that they have contributed to strengthening the agricultural structures of the legal persons or groups concerned.
