Article 1
Amendments to Directive 2003/87/EC
Directive 2003/87/EC is hereby amended as follows:
1.
the following title shall be inserted before Article 1:

                                    ‘CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS’;
2.
the following paragraph shall be added to Article 2:
‘3.   The application of this Directive to the airport of Gibraltar is understood to be without prejudice to the respective legal positions of the Kingdom of Spain and the United Kingdom with regard to the dispute over sovereignty over the territory in which the airport is situated.’;
3.
Article 3 shall be amended as follows:
(a)
point (b) shall be replaced by the following:
‘(b)
“emissions” means the release of greenhouse gases into the atmosphere from sources in an installation or the release from an aircraft performing an aviation activity listed in Annex I of the gases specified in respect of that activity;’
(b)
the following points shall be added:
‘(o)
“aircraft operator” means the person who operates an aircraft at the time it performs an aviation activity listed in Annex I or, where that person is not known or is not identified by the owner of the aircraft, the owner of the aircraft;
(p)
“commercial air transport operator” means an operator that, for remuneration, provides scheduled or non-scheduled air transport services to the public for the carriage of passengers, freight or mail;
(q)
“administering Member State” means the Member State responsible for administering the Community scheme in respect of an aircraft operator in accordance with Article 18a;
(r)
“attributed aviation emissions” means emissions from all flights falling within the aviation activities listed in Annex I which depart from an aerodrome situated in the territory of a Member State and those which arrive in such an aerodrome from a third country;
(s)
“historical aviation emissions” means the mean average of the annual emissions in the calendar years 2004, 2005 and 2006 from aircraft performing an aviation activity listed in Annex I.’;
4.
the following Chapter shall be inserted after Article 3:

                                       ‘CHAPTER II
AVIATION
Article 3a
Scope
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to the allocation and issue of allowances in respect of aviation activities listed in Annex I.
Article 3b
Aviation activities
By 2 August 2009, the Commission shall, in accordance with the regulatory procedure referred to in Article 23(2), develop guidelines on the detailed interpretation of the aviation activities listed in Annex I.
Article 3c
Total quantity of allowances for aviation
1.   For the period from 1 January 2012 to 31 December 2012, the total quantity of allowances to be allocated to aircraft operators shall be equivalent to 97 % of the historical aviation emissions.
2.   For the period referred to in Article 11(2) beginning on 1 January 2013, and, in the absence of any amendments following the review referred to in Article 30(4), for each subsequent period, the total quantity of allowances to be allocated to aircraft operators shall be equivalent to 95 % of the historical aviation emissions multiplied by the number of years in the period.
This percentage may be reviewed as part of the general review of this Directive.
3.   The Commission shall review the total quantity of allowances to be allocated to aircraft operators in accordance with Article 30(4).
4.   By 2 August 2009, the Commission shall decide on the historical aviation emissions, based on best available data, including estimates based on actual traffic information. That decision shall be considered within the Committee referred to in Article 23(1).
Article 3d
Method of allocation of allowances for aviation through auctioning
1.   In the period referred to in Article 3c(1), 15 % of allowances shall be auctioned.
2.   From 1 January 2013, 15 % of allowances shall be auctioned. This percentage may be increased as part of the general review of this Directive.
3.   A Regulation shall be adopted containing detailed provisions for the auctioning by Member States of allowances not required to be issued free of charge in accordance with paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article or Article 3f(8). The number of allowances to be auctioned in each period by each Member State shall be proportionate to its share of the total attributed aviation emissions for all Member States for the reference year reported pursuant to Article 14(3) and verified pursuant to Article 15. For the period referred to in Article 3c(1), the reference year shall be 2010 and for each subsequent period referred to in Article 3c the reference year shall be the calendar year ending 24 months before the start of the period to which the auction relates.
That Regulation, designed to amend non-essential elements of this Directive by supplementing it, shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 23(3).
4.   It shall be for Member States to determine the use to be made of revenues generated from the auctioning of allowances. Those revenues should be used to tackle climate change in the EU and third countries, inter alia, to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, to adapt to the impacts of climate change in the EU and third countries, especially developing countries, to fund research and development for mitigation and adaptation, including in particular in the fields of aeronautics and air transport, to reduce emissions through low-emission transport and to cover the cost of administering the Community scheme. The proceeds of auctioning should also be used to fund contributions to the Global Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Fund, and measures to avoid deforestation.
Member States shall inform the Commission of actions taken pursuant to this paragraph.
5.   Information provided to the Commission pursuant to this Directive does not free Member States from the notification obligation laid down in Article 88(3) of the Treaty.
Article 3e
Allocation and issue of allowances to aircraft operators
1.   For each period referred to in Article 3c, each aircraft operator may apply for an allocation of allowances that are to be allocated free of charge. An application may be made by submitting to the competent authority in the administering Member State verified tonne-kilometre data for the aviation activities listed in Annex I performed by that aircraft operator for the monitoring year. For the purposes of this Article, the monitoring year shall be the calendar year ending 24 months before the start of the period to which it relates in accordance with Annexes IV and V or, in relation to the period referred to in Article 3c(1), 2010. Any application shall be made at least 21 months before the start of the period to which it relates or, in relation to the period referred to in Article 3c(1), by 31 March 2011.
2.   At least 18 months before the start of the period to which the application relates or, in relation to the period referred to in Article 3c(1), by 30 June 2011, Member States shall submit applications received under paragraph 1 to the Commission.
3.   At least 15 months before the start of each period referred to in Article 3c(2) or, in relation to the period referred to in Article 3c(1), by 30 September 2011, the Commission shall calculate and adopt a decision setting out:
(a)
the total quantity of allowances to be allocated for that period in accordance with Article 3c;
(b)
the number of allowances to be auctioned in that period in accordance with Article 3d;
(c)
the number of allowances in the special reserve for aircraft operators in that period in accordance with Article 3f(1);
(d)
the number of allowances to be allocated free of charge in that period by subtracting the number of allowances referred to in points (b) and (c) from the total quantity of allowances decided upon under point (a); and
(e)
the benchmark to be used to allocate allowances free of charge to aircraft operators whose applications were submitted to the Commission in accordance with paragraph 2.
The benchmark referred to in point (e), expressed as allowances per tonne-kilometre, shall be calculated by dividing the number of allowances referred to in point (d) by the sum of the tonne-kilometre data included in applications submitted to the Commission in accordance with paragraph 2.
4.   Within three months from the date on which the Commission adopts a decision under paragraph 3, each administering Member State shall calculate and publish:
(a)
the total allocation of allowances for the period to each aircraft operator whose application it submitted to the Commission in accordance with paragraph 2, calculated by multiplying the tonne-kilometre data included in the application by the benchmark referred to in paragraph 3(e); and
(b)
the allocation of allowances to each aircraft operator for each year, which shall be determined by dividing its total allocation of allowances for the period calculated under point (a) by the number of years in the period for which that aircraft operator is performing an aviation activity listed in Annex I.
5.   By 28 February 2012 and by 28 February of each subsequent year, the competent authority of the administering Member State shall issue to each aircraft operator the number of allowances allocated to that aircraft operator for that year under this Article or Article 3f.
Article 3f
Special reserve for certain aircraft operators
1.   In each period referred to in Article 3c(2), 3 % of the total quantity of allowances to be allocated shall be set aside in a special reserve for aircraft operators:
(a)
who start performing an aviation activity falling within Annex I after the monitoring year for which tonne-kilometre data was submitted under Article 3e(1) in respect of a period referred to in Article 3c(2); or
(b)
whose tonne-kilometre data increases by an average of more than 18 % annually between the monitoring year for which tonne-kilometre data was submitted under Article 3e(1) in respect of a period referred to in Article 3c(2) and the second calendar year of that period;
and whose activity under point (a), or additional activity under point (b), is not in whole or in part a continuation of an aviation activity previously performed by another aircraft operator.
2.   An aircraft operator who is eligible under paragraph 1 may apply for a free allocation of allowances from the special reserve by making an application to the competent authority of its administering Member State. Any application shall be made by 30 June in the third year of the period referred to in Article 3c(2) to which it relates.
An allocation to an aircraft operator under paragraph 1(b) shall not exceed 1 000 000 allowances.
3.   An application under paragraph 2 shall:
(a)
include verified tonne-kilometre data in accordance with Annexes IV and V for the aviation activities listed in Annex I performed by the aircraft operator in the second calendar year of the period referred to in Article 3c(2) to which the application relates;
(b)
provide evidence that the criteria for eligibility under paragraph 1 are fulfilled; and
(c)
in the case of aircraft operators falling within paragraph 1(b), state:
(i)
the percentage increase in tonne-kilometres performed by that aircraft operator between the monitoring year for which tonne-kilometre data was submitted under Article 3e(1) in respect of a period referred to in Article 3c(2) and the second calendar year of that period;
(ii)
the absolute growth in tonne-kilometres performed by that aircraft operator between the monitoring year for which tonne-kilometre data was submitted under Article 3e(1) in respect of a period referred to in Article 3c(2) and the second calendar year of that period; and
(iii)
the absolute growth in tonne-kilometres performed by that aircraft operator between the monitoring year for which tonne-kilometre data was submitted under Article 3e(1) in respect of a period referred to in Article 3c(2) and the second calendar year of that period which exceeds the percentage specified in paragraph 1(b).
4.   No later than six months from the deadline for making an application under paragraph 2, Member States shall submit applications received under that paragraph to the Commission.
5.   No later than 12 months from the deadline for making an application under paragraph 2, the Commission shall decide on the benchmark to be used to allocate allowances free of charge to aircraft operators whose applications were submitted to the Commission in accordance with paragraph 4.
Subject to paragraph 6, the benchmark shall be calculated by dividing the number of the allowances in the special reserve by the sum of:
(a)
the tonne-kilometre data for aircraft operators falling within paragraph 1(a) included in applications submitted to the Commission in accordance with paragraphs 3(a) and 4; and
(b)
the absolute growth in tonne-kilometres exceeding the percentage specified in paragraph 1(b) for aircraft operators falling within paragraph 1(b) included in applications submitted to the Commission in accordance with paragraphs 3(c)(iii) and 4.
6.   The benchmark referred to in paragraph 5 shall not result in an annual allocation per tonne-kilometre greater than the annual allocation per tonne-kilometre to aircraft operators under Article 3e(4).
7.   Within three months from the date on which the Commission adopts a decision under paragraph 5, each administering Member State shall calculate and publish:
(a)
the allocation of allowances from the special reserve to each aircraft operator whose application it submitted to the Commission in accordance with paragraph 4. This allocation shall be calculated by multiplying the benchmark referred to in paragraph 5 by:
(i)
in the case of an aircraft operator falling within paragraph 1(a), the tonne-kilometre data included in the application submitted to the Commission under paragraphs 3(a) and 4;
(ii)
in the case of an aircraft operator falling within paragraph 1(b), the absolute growth in tonne-kilometres exceeding the percentage specified in paragraph 1(b) included in the application submitted to the Commission under paragraphs 3(c)(iii) and 4; and
(b)
the allocation of allowances to each aircraft operator for each year, which shall be determined by dividing its allocation of allowances under point (a) by the number of full calendar years remaining in the period referred to in Article 3c(2) to which the allocation relates.
8.   Any unallocated allowances in the special reserve shall be auctioned by Member States.
9.   The Commission may establish detailed rules on the operation of the special reserve under this Article, including the assessment of compliance with eligibility criteria under paragraph 1. Those measures, designed to amend non-essential elements of this Directive by supplementing it, shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 23(3).
Article 3g
Monitoring and reporting plans
The administering Member State shall ensure that each aircraft operator submits to the competent authority in that Member State a monitoring plan setting out measures to monitor and report emissions and tonne-kilometre data for the purpose of an application under Article 3e and that such plans are approved by the competent authority in accordance with the guidelines adopted pursuant to Article 14.’;
5.
the following title and Article shall be inserted:

                                       ‘CHAPTER III
STATIONARY INSTALLATIONS
Article 3h
Scope
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to greenhouse gas emissions permits and the allocation and issue of allowances in respect of activities listed in Annex I other than aviation activities.’;
6.
Article 6(2)(e) shall be replaced by the following:
‘(e)
an obligation to surrender allowances, other than allowances issued under Chapter II, equal to the total emissions of the installation in each calendar year, as verified in accordance with Article 15, within four months following the end of that year.’;
7.
the following title shall be inserted after Article 11:

                                    ‘CHAPTER IV
PROVISIONS APPLYING TO AVIATION AND STATIONARY INSTALLATIONS’;
8.
in Article 11a the following paragraph shall be inserted:
‘1a.   During the period referred to in Article 3c(1), aircraft operators may use CERs and ERUs, up to 15 % of the number of allowances they are required to surrender pursuant to Article 12(2a).
For subsequent periods, the percentage of CERs and ERUs that may be used in relation to aviation activities shall be reviewed as part of the general review of this Directive and taking into consideration the development of the international climate change regime.
The Commission shall publish this percentage at least six months before the start of each period referred to in Article 3c.’;
9.
in Article 11b(2), the word ‘installations’ shall be replaced by the word ‘activities’;
10.
Article 12 shall be amended as follows:
(a)
in paragraph 2, after the word ‘purpose’ the words ‘of meeting an aircraft operator’s obligations under paragraph 2a or’ shall be inserted;
(b)
the following paragraph shall be inserted:
‘2a.   Administering Member States shall ensure that, by 30 April each year, each aircraft operator surrenders a number of allowances equal to the total emissions during the preceding calendar year from aviation activities listed in Annex I for which it is the aircraft operator, as verified in accordance with Article 15. Member States shall ensure that allowances surrendered in accordance with this paragraph are subsequently cancelled.’;
(c)
paragraph 3 shall be replaced by the following:
‘3.   Member States shall ensure that, by 30 April each year, the operator of each installation surrenders a number of allowances, other than allowances issued under Chapter II, equal to the total emissions from that installation during the preceding calendar year as verified in accordance with Article 15, and that these are subsequently cancelled.’;
11.
in Article 13(3), the words ‘Article 12(3)’ shall be replaced by the words ‘Article 12(2a) or (3)’;
12.
Article 14 shall be amended as follows:
(a)
in the first sentence of paragraph 1:
(i)
after the words ‘those activities’ the words ‘and of tonne-kilometre data for the purpose of an application under Articles 3e or 3f’ shall be inserted;
(ii)
the words ‘, by 30 September 2003’ shall be deleted;
(b)
paragraph 3 shall be replaced by the following:
‘3.   Member States shall ensure that each operator or aircraft operator reports the emissions during each calendar year from the installation, or, from 1 January 2010, the aircraft, which it operates to the competent authority after the end of that year in accordance with the guidelines.’;
13.
Article 15 shall be replaced by the following:
‘Article 15
Verification
Member States shall ensure that the reports submitted by operators and aircraft operators pursuant to Article 14(3) are verified in accordance with the criteria set out in Annex V and any detailed provisions adopted by the Commission in accordance with this Article, and that the competent authority is informed thereof.
Member States shall ensure that an operator or aircraft operator whose report has not been verified as satisfactory in accordance with the criteria set out in Annex V and any detailed provisions adopted by the Commission in accordance with this Article by 31 March each year for emissions during the preceding year cannot make further transfers of allowances until a report from that operator or aircraft operator has been verified as satisfactory.
The Commission may adopt detailed provisions for the verification of reports submitted by aircraft operators pursuant to Article 14(3) and applications under Articles 3e and 3f, including the verification procedures to be used by verifiers, in accordance with the regulatory procedure referred to in Article 23(2).’;
14.
Article 16 shall be amended as follows:
(a)
in paragraph 1, the words ‘by 31 December 2003 at the latest,’ shall be deleted;
(b)
paragraphs 2 and 3 shall be replaced by the following:
‘2.   Member States shall ensure publication of the names of operators and aircraft operators who are in breach of requirements to surrender sufficient allowances under this Directive.
3.   Member States shall ensure that any operator or aircraft operator who does not surrender sufficient allowances by 30 April of each year to cover its emissions during the preceding year shall be held liable for the payment of an excess emissions penalty. The excess emissions penalty shall be EUR 100 for each tonne of carbon dioxide equivalent emitted for which the operator or aircraft operator has not surrendered allowances. Payment of the excess emissions penalty shall not release the operator or aircraft operator from the obligation to surrender an amount of allowances equal to those excess emissions when surrendering allowances in relation to the following calendar year.’;
(c)
the following paragraphs shall be added:
‘5.   In the event that an aircraft operator fails to comply with the requirements of this Directive and where other enforcement measures have failed to ensure compliance, its administering Member State may request the Commission to decide on the imposition of an operating ban on the aircraft operator concerned.
6.   Any request by an administering Member State under paragraph 5 shall include:
(a)
evidence that the aircraft operator has not complied with its obligations under this Directive;
(b)
details of the enforcement action which has been taken by that Member State;
(c)
a justification for the imposition of an operating ban at Community level; and
(d)
a recommendation for the scope of an operating ban at Community level and any conditions that should be applied.
7.   When requests such as those referred to in paragraph 5 are addressed to the Commission, the Commission shall inform the other Member States through their representatives on the Committee referred to in Article 23(1) in accordance with the Committee’s Rules of Procedure.
8.   The adoption of a decision following a request pursuant to paragraph 5 shall be preceded, when appropriate and practicable, by consultations with the authorities responsible for regulatory oversight of the aircraft operator concerned. Whenever possible, consultations shall be held jointly by the Commission and the Member States.
9.   When the Commission is considering whether to adopt a decision following a request pursuant to paragraph 5, it shall disclose to the aircraft operator concerned the essential facts and considerations which form the basis for such decision. The aircraft operator concerned shall be given an opportunity to submit written comments to the Commission within 10 working days from the date of disclosure.
10.   At the request of a Member State, the Commission may, in accordance with the regulatory procedure referred to in Article 23(2), adopt a decision to impose an operating ban on the aircraft operator concerned.
11.   Each Member State shall enforce, within its territory, any decisions adopted under paragraph 10. It shall inform the Commission of any measures taken to implement such decisions.
12.   Where appropriate, detailed rules shall be established in respect of the procedures referred to in this Article. Those measures, designed to amend non-essential elements of this Directive by supplementing it, shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 23(3).’;
15.
the following Articles shall be inserted:
‘Article 18a
Administering Member State
1.   The administering Member State in respect of an aircraft operator shall be:
(a)
in the case of an aircraft operator with a valid operating licence granted by a Member State in accordance with the provisions of Council Regulation (EEC) No 2407/92 of 23 July 1992 on licensing of air carriers (*1), the Member State which granted the operating licence in respect of that aircraft operator; and
(b)
in all other cases, the Member State with the greatest estimated attributed aviation emissions from flights performed by that aircraft operator in the base year.
2.   Where in the first two years of any period referred to in Article 3c, none of the attributed aviation emissions from flights performed by an aircraft operator falling within paragraph 1(b) of this Article are attributed to its administering Member State, the aircraft operator shall be transferred to another administering Member State in respect of the next period. The new administering Member State shall be the Member State with the greatest estimated attributed aviation emissions from flights performed by that aircraft operator during the first two years of the previous period.
3.   Based on the best available information, the Commission shall:
(a)
before 1 February 2009, publish a list of aircraft operators which performed an aviation activity listed in Annex I on or after 1 January 2006 specifying the administering Member State for each aircraft operator in accordance with paragraph 1; and
(b)
before 1 February of each subsequent year, update the list to include aircraft operators which have subsequently performed an aviation activity listed in Annex I.
4.   The Commission may, in accordance with the regulatory procedure referred to in Article 23(2), develop guidelines relating to the administration of aircraft operators under this Directive by administering Member States.
5.   For the purposes of paragraph 1, “base year” means, in relation to an aircraft operator which started operating in the Community after 1 January 2006, the first calendar year of operation, and in all other cases, the calendar year starting on 1 January 2006.
Article 18b
Assistance from Eurocontrol
For the purposes of carrying out its obligations under Articles 3c(4) and 18a, the Commission may request the assistance of Eurocontrol or another relevant organisation and may conclude to that effect any appropriate agreements with those organisations.

(*1)  
                                                      OJ L 240, 24.8.1992, p. 1.’;"
                        
16.
in Article 19, paragraph 3 shall be amended as follows:
(a)
the last sentence shall be replaced by the following:

                                    ‘That Regulation shall also include provisions concerning the use and identification of CERs and ERUs in the Community scheme and the monitoring of the level of such use and provisions to take account of the inclusion of aviation activities in the Community scheme.’;
(b)
the following subparagraph shall be added:
‘The Regulation on a standardised and secured system of registries shall ensure that allowances, CERs and ERUs surrendered by aircraft operators are transferred to Member States’ retirement accounts for the Kyoto Protocol’s first commitment period only to the extent that those allowances, CERs and ERUs correspond to emissions included in the national totals of Member States’ national inventories for that period.’;
17.
in Article 23, paragraph 3 shall be replaced by the following:
‘3.   Where reference is made to this paragraph, Article 5a(1) to (4) and Article 7 of Decision 1999/468/EC shall apply, having regard to the provisions of Article 8 thereof.’;
18.
the following Article shall be inserted:
‘Article 25a
Third country measures to reduce the climate change impact of aviation
1.   Where a third country adopts measures for reducing the climate change impact of flights departing from that country which land in the Community, the Commission, after consulting with that third country, and with Member States within the Committee referred to in Article 23(1), shall consider options available in order to provide for optimal interaction between the Community scheme and that country’s measures.
Where necessary, the Commission may adopt amendments to provide for flights arriving from the third country concerned to be excluded from the aviation activities listed in Annex I or to provide for any other amendments to the aviation activities listed in Annex I which are required by an agreement pursuant to the fourth subparagraph. Those measures, designed to amend non-essential elements of this Directive, shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 23(3).
The Commission may propose to the European Parliament and the Council any other amendments to this Directive.
The Commission may also, where appropriate, make recommendations to the Council in accordance with Article 300(1) of the Treaty to open negotiations with a view to concluding an agreement with the third country concerned.
2.   The Community and its Member States shall continue to seek an agreement on global measures to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from aviation. In the light of any such agreement, the Commission shall consider whether amendments to this Directive as it applies to aircraft operators are necessary.’;
19.
Article 28 shall be amended as follows:
(a)
paragraph 3(b) shall be replaced by the following:
‘(b)
to be responsible for surrendering allowances, other than allowances issued under Chapter II, equal to the total emissions from installations in the pool, by way of derogation from Articles 6(2)(e) and 12(3); and’;
(b)
paragraph 4 shall be replaced by the following:
‘4.   The trustee shall be subject to the penalties applicable for breaches of requirements to surrender sufficient allowances, other than allowances issued under Chapter II, to cover the total emissions from installations in the pool, by way of derogation from Article 16(2), (3) and (4).’;
20.
the following paragraph shall be added to Article 30:
‘4.   By 1 December 2014 the Commission shall, on the basis of monitoring and experience of the application of this Directive, review the functioning of this Directive in relation to aviation activities in Annex I and may make proposals to the European Parliament and the Council pursuant to Article 251 of the Treaty as appropriate. The Commission shall give consideration in particular to:
(a)
the implications and impacts of this Directive as regards the overall functioning of the Community scheme;
(b)
the functioning of the aviation allowance market, covering in particular any possible market disturbances;
(c)
the environmental effectiveness of the Community scheme and the extent by which the total quantity of allowances to be allocated to aircraft operators under Article 3c should be reduced in line with overall EU emissions reduction targets;
(d)
the impact of the Community scheme on the aviation sector, including issues of competitiveness, taking into account in particular the effect of climate change policies implemented for aviation outside the EU;
(e)
continuing with the special reserve for aircraft operators, taking into account the likely convergence of growth rates across the industry;
(f)
the impact of the Community scheme on the structural dependency on aviation transport of islands, landlocked regions, peripheral regions and the outermost regions of the Community;
(g)
whether a gateway system should be included to facilitate the trading of allowances between aircraft operators and operators of installations whilst ensuring that no transactions would result in a net transfer of allowances from aircraft operators to operators of installations;
(h)
the implications of the exclusion thresholds as specified in Annex I in terms of certified maximum take-off mass and number of flights per year performed by an aircraft operator;
(i)
the impact of the exemption from the Community scheme of certain flights performed in the framework of public service obligations imposed in accordance with Council Regulation (EEC) No 2408/92 of 23 July 1992 on access for Community air carriers to intra-Community air routes (*2);
(j)
developments, including the potential for future developments, in the efficiency of aviation and in particular the progress towards meeting the Advisory Council for Aeronautics Research in Europe (ACARE) goal to develop and demonstrate technologies able to reduce fuel consumption by 50 % by 2020 and whether further measures to increase efficiency are necessary;
(k)
developments in scientific understanding on the climate change impacts of contrails and cirrus clouds caused by aviation with a view to proposing effective mitigation measures.
The Commission shall then report to the European Parliament and the Council.

(*2)  
                                                   OJ L 240, 24.8.1992, p. 8.’;"
                        
21.
the following title shall be inserted after Article 30:

                                    ‘CHAPTER V
FINAL PROVISIONS’;
22.
Annexes I, IV and V shall be amended in accordance with the Annex to this Directive.
