Article 31
Global methane monitoring tool and rapid reaction mechanism
1.   By 5 August 2026, the Commission shall establish a global methane monitoring tool based on satellite data and input from several certified data providers and services, including the Copernicus component of the Union Space Programme established by Regulation (EU) 2021/696. To that end, the Commission may use existing international tools or frameworks, where available.
The global methane monitoring tool shall be made publicly available and shall provide regular updates at least on the occurrence, magnitude and location of high methane-emitting events from energy sources within or outside the Union.
2.   By 5 February 2026, the Commission shall establish a rapid reaction mechanism to address super-emitting events.
The Commission shall promptly notify any detected super-emitting event to the Member State or third country under whose jurisdiction the event has taken place, as appropriate. Where feasible, the Commission shall also notify the producer related to the source or set of connected sources emitting methane. That notification shall include a request to promptly provide additional information on the super-emitting event and the remedial measures taken or planned to be taken to mitigate the impact or stop the event, including the timeframe within which those measures are to take place. The Commission shall undertake all necessary contacts in order to obtain and verify the information received in connection with the event, including, where applicable, in cooperation with competent international organisations. To that end, the Commission may use existing international tools or frameworks, where available.
3.   The Commission shall propose to establish on the Union’s behalf bilateral dialogues with third countries from which the Union imports crude oil, natural gas or coal with the aim to set up a framework for an information exchange and an early detection and warning system to detect and alert each other of the occurrence of super-emitting events and remedial measures taken or to be taken in order to prevent or stop such events. Those dialogues shall also aim to identify ways to accelerate the reduction of methane emissions in the energy sector and, if necessary, may offer an exchange of best practices and advice to set up monitoring, reporting, verification and reduction measures equivalent to those established in this Regulation.
The Commission shall not propose to establish bilateral dialogues with third countries where that would circumvent restrictive measures adopted under Article 215 TFEU on the import of crude oil, natural gas and coal.
4.   Based on the monitoring carried out in the context of the dialogues referred to in paragraphs 2 and 3, the Commission shall keep the European Parliament and the Council informed about the notifications of super-emitting events and the implementation of remedial measures in the Union and in third countries from which the Union imports crude oil, natural gas or coal and any potential impact on the security of energy supply at Union and national level.
5.   This Article shall apply without prejudice to Directive (EU) 2016/943.
