Article 2
Consistency and complementarity of Union assistance
1.   The Commission shall ensure that measures adopted pursuant to this Regulation are consistent with the Union's overall strategic policy framework for the partner countries, and in particular with the objectives of the measures referred to in paragraph 2, as well as with other relevant Union measures.
2.   Measures adopted pursuant to this Regulation may be complementary to, and shall be consistent with, measures adopted under Title V TEU and Part Five TFEU. Measures adopted pursuant to this Regulation shall duly take into consideration the views of the European Parliament.
3.   Union assistance under this Regulation shall be complementary to that provided for under Union instruments for external assistance, shall be provided only to the extent that an adequate and effective response cannot be provided under those instruments, and shall be planned and implemented in such a way as to achieve continuity of actions under those instruments, where applicable.
4.   The following cross-cutting issues shall be included, where possible, including in programming:
(a)
promotion of democracy and good governance;
(b)
human rights and humanitarian law, including children's rights and the rights of indigenous peoples;
(c)
non-discrimination;
(d)
gender equality and the empowerment of women;
(e)
conflict prevention; and
(f)
climate change.
5.   Activities falling within the scope of Council Regulation (EC) No 1257/96 (8) and Decision No 1313/2013/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council (9) which are eligible for funding under those acts shall not be funded under this Regulation.
6.   In order to enhance the effectiveness and complementarity of Union and national assistance measures and to prevent double funding, the Commission shall promote close coordination among Union activities and with those of the Member States, both at decision-making level and on the ground. To that end, the Member States and the Commission shall operate a system for exchanging information. The Commission may take initiatives to promote such coordination. In addition, the Commission shall ensure coordination and cooperation with multilateral, regional and sub-regional organisations and other donors.
