Article 8
Thematic strategy papers and multiannual indicative programmes
1.   Thematic strategy papers shall constitute the general basis for the implementation of assistance under Articles 4 and 5. Thematic strategy papers shall provide a framework for cooperation between the Union and the partner countries or regions concerned.
2.   The preparation and implementation of thematic strategy papers shall comply with the principles of aid effectiveness, such as partnership, coordination and, where applicable, harmonisation. To that end, thematic strategy papers shall be consistent with, and avoid duplication of, programming documents approved or adopted under other Union instruments for external assistance.
Thematic strategy papers shall, in principle, be based on a dialogue of the Union or, where appropriate, the relevant Member States with the partner countries or regions concerned involving civil society and regional and local authorities, so as to ensure that the countries or regions concerned acquire sufficient ownership of the programming process.
The Union and the Member States shall consult each other at an early stage of the programming process in order to promote consistency and complementarity among their cooperation activities.
3.   Each thematic strategy paper shall be accompanied by a multiannual indicative programme summarising the priority areas selected for Union financing, the specific objectives, the expected results, the performance indicators and the time frame of Union assistance.
The multiannual indicative programme shall determine the indicative financial allocations for each programme therein, taking into account the needs and the particular difficulties of the partner countries or regions concerned. The financial allocations may be given in the form of a range where necessary.
4.   Thematic strategy papers shall be approved and multiannual indicative programmes shall be adopted by the Commission in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 16(3) of Regulation (EU) No 236/2014. That procedure shall also apply to substantial reviews which have the effect of significantly modifying thematic strategy papers or multiannual indicative programmes.
5.   The examination procedure referred to in Article 16(3) of Regulation (EU) No 236/2014 shall not apply to non-substantial modifications or technical adjustments to thematic strategy papers and multiannual indicative programmes pursuant to which funds are reassigned within the indicative financial allocations per priority area, or the size of the initial indicative financial allocation is increased or decreased by not more than 20 % but by an amount not exceeding EUR 10 000 000, provided that such modifications or technical adjustments do not affect the priority areas and objectives set out in those documents.
In such cases, modifications or technical adjustments shall be communicated without delay to the European Parliament and to the representatives of the Member States in the committee referred to in Article 11.
6.   On duly justified imperative grounds of urgency relating to the need for a swift response from the Union, the Commission may modify thematic strategy papers and multiannual indicative programmes in accordance with the procedure referred in Article 16(4) of Regulation (EU) No 236/2014.
7.   Any programming or review of programmes taking place after the publication of the mid-term review report referred to in Article 17 of Regulation (EU) No 236/2014 shall take into account the results, findings and conclusions of that report.
