Article 273
Methods for calculating the exposure value
1.   Institutions shall determine the exposure value for the contracts listed in Annex II on the basis of one of the methods set out in Sections 3 to 6 in accordance with this Article.
An institution which is not eligible for the treatment set out in Article 94 shall not use the method set out in Section 4. To determine the exposure value for the contracts listed in point 3 of Annex II an institution shall not use the method set out in Section 4. Institutions may use in combination the methods set out in Sections 3 to 6 on a permanent basis within a group. A single institution shall not use in combination the methods set out in Sections 3 to 6 on a permanent basis but shall be permitted to use in combination methods set out in Sections 3 and 5 when one of the methods is used for the cases set out in Article 282(6).
2.   Where permitted by the competent authorities in accordance with Article 283(1) and (2), an institution may determine the exposure value for the following items using the Internal Model Method set out in Section 6:
(a)
the contracts listed in Annex II;
(b)
repurchase transactions;
(c)
securities or commodities lending or borrowing transactions;
(d)
margin lending transactions;
(e)
long settlement transactions.
3.   When an institution purchases protection through a credit derivative against a non-trading book exposure or against a counterparty risk exposure, it may calculate its own funds requirement for the hedged exposure in accordance with either of the following:
(a)
Articles 233 to 236;
(b)
in accordance with Article 153(3), or Article 183, where permission has been granted in accordance with Article 143.
The exposure value for CCR for those credit derivatives shall be zero, unless an institution applies the approach (ii) in point (h) of Article 299(2).
4.   Notwithstanding paragraph 3, an institution may choose consistently to include for the purposes of calculating own funds requirements for counterparty credit risk all credit derivatives not included in the trading book and purchased as protection against a non-trading book exposure or against a counterparty credit risk exposure where the credit protection is recognised under this Regulation.
5.   Where credit default swaps sold by an institution are treated by an institution as credit protection provided by that institution and are subject to own funds requirement for credit risk of the underlying for the full notional amount, their exposure value for the purposes of CCR in the non-trading book shall be zero.
6.   Under all methods set out in Sections 3 to 6, the exposure value for a given counterparty shall be equal to the sum of the exposure values calculated for each netting set with that counterparty.
For a given counterparty, the exposure value for a given netting set of OTC derivative instruments listed in Annex II calculated in accordance with this Chapter shall be the greater of zero and the difference between the sum of exposure values across all netting sets with the counterparty and the sum of CVA for that counterparty being recognised by the institution as an incurred write-down. The credit valuation adjustments shall be calculated without taking into account any offsetting debit value adjustment attributed to the own credit risk of the firm that has been already excluded from own funds under Article 33(1)(c).
7.   Institutions shall determine the exposure value for exposures arising from long settlement transactions by any of the methods set out in Sections 3 to 6, regardless of which method the institution has chosen for treating OTC derivatives and repurchase transactions, securities or commodities lending or borrowing transactions, and margin lending transactions. In calculating the own funds requirements for long settlement transactions, an institution that uses the approach set out in Chapter 3 may assign the risk weights under the approach set out in Chapter 2 on a permanent basis and irrespective of the materiality of such positions.
8.   For the methods set out in Sections 3 and 4, the institution shall adopt a consistent methodology for determining the notional amount for different product types, and shall ensure that the notional amount to be taken into account provides an appropriate measure of the risk inherent in the contract. Where the contract provides for a multiplication of cash flows, the notional amount shall be adjusted by an institution to take into account the effects of the multiplication on the risk structure of that contract.
For the methods set out in Sections 3 to 6, institutions shall treat transactions where specific wrong way risk has been identified in accordance with Article 291(2), (4), (5) and (6) as appropriate.
