Article 20
Joint decisions on prudential requirements
1.   The competent authorities shall work together, in full consultation:
(a)
in the case of applications for the permissions referred to in Article 143(1), Article 151(4) and (9), Article 283, Article 312(2) and Article363 respectively submitted by an EU parent institution and its subsidiaries, or jointly by the subsidiaries of an EU parent financial holding company or EU parent mixed financial holding company, to decide whether or not to grant the permission sought and to determine the terms and conditions, if any, to which such permission should be subject;
(b)
for the purposes of determining whether the criteria for a specific intragroup treatment as referred to in Article 422(9) and Article 425(5) complemented by the EBA regulatory technical standards referred to in Article 422(10) and Article 425(6) are met.
Applications shall be submitted only to the consolidating supervisor.
The application referred to in Article 312(2), shall include a description of the methodology used for allocating operational risk capital between the different entities of the group. The application shall indicate whether and how diversification effects are intended to be factored in the risk measurement system.
2.   The competent authorities shall do everything within their power to reach a joint decision within six months on:
(a)
the application referred to in point (a) of paragraph 1;
(b)
the assessment of the criteria and the determination of the specific treatment referred to in point (b) of paragraph 1.
This joint decision shall be set out in a document containing the fully reasoned decision which shall be provided to the applicant by the competent authority referred to in paragraph 1.
3.   The period referred to in paragraph 2 shall begin:
(a)
on the date of receipt of the complete application referred to in point (a) of paragraph 1 by the consolidating supervisor. The consolidating supervisor shall forward the complete application to the other competent authorities without delay;
(b)
on the date of receipt by competent authorities of a report prepared by the consolidating supervisor analysing intragroup commitments within the group.
4.   In the absence of a joint decision between the competent authorities within six months, the consolidating supervisor shall make its own decision on point (a) of paragraph 1. The decision of the consolidating supervisor shall not limit the powers of the competent authorities under Article 105 of Directive 2013/36/EU.
The decision shall be set out in a document containing the fully reasoned decision and shall take into account the views and reservations of the other competent authorities expressed during the six months period.
The decision shall be provided to the EU parent institution, the EU parent financial holding company or to the EU parent mixed financial holding company and the other competent authorities by the consolidating supervisor.
If, at the end of the six month period, any of the competent authorities concerned has referred the matter to EBA in accordance with Article 19 of Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010, the consolidating supervisor shall defer its decision on point (a) of paragraph 1 of this Article and await any decision that EBA may take in accordance with Article 19(3) of that Regulation on its decision, and shall take its decision in conformity with the decision of EBA. The six-month period shall be deemed the conciliation period within the meaning of that Regulation. EBA shall take its decision within one month. The matter shall not be referred to EBA after the end of the six month period or after a joint decision has been reached.
5.   In the absence of a joint decision between the competent authorities within six months, the competent authority responsible for the supervision of the subsidiary on an individual basis shall make its own decision on point (b) of paragraph 1.
The decision shall be set out in a document containing the fully reasoned decision and shall take into account the views and reservations of the other competent authorities expressed during the six months period.
The decision shall be provided to the consolidating supervisor that informs the EU parent institution, the EU parent financial holding company or the EU parent mixed financial holding company.
If, at the end of the six month period, the consolidating supervisor has referred the matter to EBA in accordance with Article 19 of Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010, the competent authority responsible for the supervision of the subsidiary on an individual basis shall defer its decision on point (b) of paragraph 1 of this Article and await any decision that EBA may take in accordance with Article 19(3) of that Regulation on its decision, and shall take its decision in conformity with the decision of EBA. The six-month period shall be deemed the conciliation period within the meaning of that Regulation. EBA shall take its decision within one month. The matter shall not be referred to EBA after the end of the six month period or after a joint decision has been reached.
6.   Where an EU parent institution and its subsidiaries, the subsidiaries of an EU parent financial holding company or an EU parent mixed financial holding company use an Advanced Measurement Approach referred to in Article 312(2) or an IRB Approach referred to in Article 143 on a unified basis, the competent authorities shall allow the qualifying criteria set out in Articles 321 and 322 or in Part Three, Title II, Chapter 3, Section 6 respectively to be met by the parent and its subsidiaries considered together, in a way that is consistent with the structure of the group and its risk management systems, processes and methodologies.
7.   The decisions referred to in paragraphs 2, 4 and 5 shall be recognised as determinative and applied by the competent authorities in the Member States concerned.
8.   EBA shall develop draft implementing technical standards to specify the joint decision process referred to in point (a) of paragraph 1, with regard to the applications for permissions referred to in Article 143(1), Article 151(4) and (9), Article 283, Article 312(2), and Article 363 with a view to facilitating joint decisions.
EBA shall submit those draft implementing technical standards to the Commission by 31 December 2014.
Power is conferred on the Commission to adopt the implementing technical standards referred to in the first subparagraph in accordance with Article 15 of Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010.
