Article 8
Derogation to the application of liquidity requirements on an individual basis
1.   The competent authorities may waive in full or in part the application of Part Six to an institution and to all or some of its subsidiaries in the Union and supervise them as a single liquidity sub-group so long as they fulfil all of the following conditions:
(a)
the parent institution on a consolidated basis or a subsidiary institution on a sub-consolidated basis complies with the obligations laid down in Part Six;
(b)
the parent institution on a consolidated basis or the subsidiary institution on a sub-consolidated basis monitors and has oversight at all times over the liquidity positions of all institutions within the group or sub-group, that are subject to the waiver and ensures a sufficient level of liquidity for all of these institutions;
(c)
the institutions have entered into contracts that, to the satisfaction of the competent authorities, provide for the free movement of funds between them to enable them to meet their individual and joint obligations as they come due;
(d)
there is no current or foreseen material practical or legal impediment to the fulfilment of the contracts referred to in (c).
By 1 January 2014 the Commission shall report to the European Parliament and the Council on any legal obstacles which are capable of rendering impossible the application of point (c) of the first subparagraph and is invited to make a legislative proposal, if appropriate, by 31 December 2015 on which of those obstacles should be removed.
2.   The competent authorities may waive in full or in part the application of Part Six to an institution and to all or some of its subsidiaries where all institutions of the single liquidity sub-group are authorised in the same Member State and provided that the conditions in paragraph 1 are fulfilled.
3.   Where institutions of the single liquidity sub-group are authorised in several Member States, paragraph 1 shall only be applied after following the procedure laid down in Article 21 and only to the institutions whose competent authorities agree about the following elements:
(a)
their assessment of the compliance of the organisation and of the treatment of liquidity risk with the conditions set out in Article 86 of Directive 2013/36/EU across the single liquidity sub-group;
(b)
the distribution of amounts, location and ownership of the required liquid assets to be held within the single liquidity sub-group;
(c)
the determination of minimum amounts of liquid assets to be held by institutions for which the application of Part Six will be waived;
(d)
the need for stricter parameters than those set out in Part Six;
(e)
unrestricted sharing of complete information between the competent authorities;
(f)
a full understanding of the implications of such a waiver.
4.   Competent authorities may also apply paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 to institutions which are members of the same institutional protection scheme referred to in Article 113(7)(b), provided that they meet all the conditions laid down in Article 113(7), and to other institutions linked by a relationship referred to in Article 113(6) provided that they meet all the conditions laid down therein. Competent authorities shall in that case determine one of the institutions subject to the waiver to meet Part Six on the basis of the consolidated situation of all institutions of the single liquidity sub-group.
5.   Where a waiver has been granted under paragraph 1 or paragraph 2, the competent authorities may also apply Article 86 of Directive 2013/36/EU, or parts thereof, at the level of the single liquidity sub-group and waive the application of Article 86 of Directive 2013/36/EU, or parts thereof, on an individual basis.
