Article 303
Treatment of clearing members' exposures to CCPs
1.   Where an institution acts as a clearing member, either for its own purposes or as a financial intermediary between a client and a CCP, it shall calculate the own funds requirements for its exposures to a CCP in accordance with Article 301(2) and (3).
2.   Where an institution acts as a clearing member and, in that capacity, acts as a financial intermediary between a client and a CCP, it shall calculate the own funds requirements for its CCP-related transactions with the client in accordance with the Sections 1 to 8 of this Chapter, as applicable.
3.   Where an institution is a client of a clearing member, it shall calculate the own funds requirements for its CCP-related transactions with the clearing member in accordance with the Sections 1 to 8 of this Chapter, as applicable.
4.   As an alternative to the approach specified in paragraph 3, where an institution is a client, it may calculate the own funds requirements for its CCP-related transactions with the clearing member in accordance with Article 305(2) provided that both of the following conditions are met:
(a)
the positions and assets of that institution related to those transactions are distinguished and segregated within the meaning of Article 39 of Regulation (EU) No 648/2012, at the level of both the clearing member and the CCP, from the positions and assets of both the clearing member and the other clients of that clearing member and as a result of that segregation those positions and assets are bankruptcy remote in the event of the default or insolvency of the clearing member or one or more of its other clients;
(b)
relevant laws, regulations, rules and contractual arrangements applicable to or binding that institution or the CCP ensure that in the event of default or insolvency of the clearing member, the transfer of the institution's positions relating to those contracts and transactions and of the corresponding collateral to another clearing member within the relevant margin period of risk.
5.   Where an institution acting as a clearing member enters into a contractual arrangement with a client of another clearing member in order to ensure that client the portability of assets and positions referred to in point (b) of paragraph 4, that institution may attribute an exposure value of zero to the contingent obligation that is created due to that contractual arrangement.
