Article 296
Recognition of contractual netting agreements
1.   Competent authorities shall recognise a contractual netting agreement only where the conditions in paragraph 2 and, where relevant, 3 are fulfilled.
2.   The following conditions shall be fulfilled by all contractual netting agreements used by an institution for the purposes of determining exposure value in this Part:
(a)
the institution has concluded a contractual netting agreement with its counterparty which creates a single legal obligation, covering all included transactions, such that, in the event of default by the counterparty it would be entitled to receive or obliged to pay only the net sum of the positive and negative mark-to-market values of included individual transactions;
(b)
the institution has made available to the competent authorities written and reasoned legal opinions to the effect that, in the event of a legal challenge of the netting agreement, the institution's claims and obligations would not exceed those referred to in point (a). The legal opinion shall refer to the applicable law:
(i)
the jurisdiction in which the counterparty is incorporated;
(ii)
if a branch of an undertaking is involved, which is located in a country other than that where the undertaking is incorporated, the jurisdiction in which the branch is located;
(iii)
the jurisdiction whose law governs the individual transactions included in the netting agreement;
(iv)
the jurisdiction whose law governs any contract or agreement necessary to effect the contractual netting;
(c)
credit risk to each counterparty is aggregated to arrive at a single legal exposure across transactions with each counterparty. This aggregation shall be factored into credit limit purposes and internal capital purposes;
(d)
the contract shall not contain any clause which, in the event of default of a counterparty, permits a non-defaulting counterparty to make limited payments only, or no payments at all, to the estate of the defaulting party, even if the defaulting party is a net creditor (i.e. walk away clause).
If any of the competent authorities are not satisfied that the contractual netting is legally valid and enforceable under the law of each of the jurisdictions referred to in point (b) the contractual netting agreement shall not be recognised as risk-reducing for either of the counterparties. Competent authorities shall inform each other accordingly.
3.   The legal opinions referred to in point (b) may be drawn up by reference to types of contractual netting. The following additional conditions shall be fulfilled by contractual cross-product netting agreements:
(a)
the net sum referred to in point (a) of paragraph 2 is the net sum of the positive and negative close out values of any included individual bilateral master agreement and of the positive and negative mark-to-market value of the individual transactions (the ‧Cross-Product Net Amount‧);
(b)
the legal opinions referred to in point (b) of paragraph 2 shall address the validity and enforceability of the entire contractual cross-product netting agreement under its terms and the impact of the netting arrangement on the material provisions of any included individual bilateral master agreement.
