Article 172
Assignment of exposures
1.   For exposures to corporates, institutions and central governments and central banks, and for equity exposures where an institution uses the PD/LGD approach set out in Article 155(3), assignment of exposures shall be carried out in accordance with the following criteria:
(a)
each obligor shall be assigned to an obligor grade as part of the credit approval process;
(b)
for those exposures for which an institution has received the permission of the competent authority to use own estimates of LGDs and conversion factors pursuant to Article 143, each exposure shall also be assigned to a facility grade as part of the credit approval process;
(c)
institutions using the methods set out in Article 153(5) for assigning risk weights for specialised lending exposures shall assign each of these exposures to a grade in accordance with Article 170(2);
(d)
each separate legal entity to which the institution is exposed shall be separately rated. An institution shall have appropriate policies regarding the treatment of individual obligor clients and groups of connected clients;
(e)
separate exposures to the same obligor shall be assigned to the same obligor grade, irrespective of any differences in the nature of each specific transaction. However, where separate exposures are allowed to result in multiple grades for the same obligor, the following shall apply:
(i)
country transfer risk, this being dependent on whether the exposures are denominated in local or foreign currency;
(ii)
the treatment of associated guarantees to an exposure may be reflected in an adjusted assignment to an obligor grade;
(iii)
consumer protection, bank secrecy or other legislation prohibit the exchange of client data.
2.   For retail exposures, each exposure shall be assigned to a grade or a pool as part of the credit approval process.
3.   For grade and pool assignments institutions shall document the situations in which human judgement may override the inputs or outputs of the assignment process and the personnel responsible for approving these overrides. Institutions shall document these overrides and note down the personnel responsible. Institutions shall analyse the performance of the exposures whose assignments have been overridden. This analysis shall include an assessment of the performance of exposures whose rating has been overridden by a particular person, accounting for all the responsible personnel.
