Article 222
Financial Collateral Simple Method
1.   Institutions may use the Financial Collateral Simple Method only where they calculate risk-weighted exposure amounts under the Standardised Approach. Institution shall not use both the Financial Collateral Simple Method and the Financial Collateral Comprehensive Method, except for the purposes of Articles 148(1) and 150(1). Institutions shall not use this exception selectively with the purpose of achieving reduced own funds requirements or with the purpose of conducting regulatory arbitrage.
2.   Under the Financial Collateral Simple Method institutions shall assign to eligible financial collateral a value equal to its market value as determined in accordance with point (d) of Article 207(4).
3.   Institutions shall assign to those portions of exposure values that are collateralised by the market value of eligible collateral the risk weight that they would assign under Chapter 2 where the lending institution had a direct exposure to the collateral instrument. For this purpose, the exposure value of an off-balance sheet item listed in Annex I shall be equal to 100 % of the item's value rather than the exposure value indicated in Article 111(1).
The risk weight of the collateralised portion shall be at least 20 % except as specified in paragraphs 4 to 6. Institutions shall apply to the remainder of the exposure value the risk weight that they would assign to an unsecured exposure to the counterparty under Chapter 2.
4.   Institutions shall assign a risk weight of 0 % to the collateralised portion of the exposure arising from repurchase transaction and securities lending or borrowing transactions which fulfil the criteria in Article 227. Where the counterparty to the transaction is not a core market participant, institutions shall assign a risk weight of 10 %.
5.   Institutions shall assign a risk weight of 0 %, to the extent of the collateralisation, to the exposure values determined under Chapter 6 for the derivative instruments listed in Annex II and subject to daily marking-to-market, collateralised by cash or cash-assimilated instruments where there is no currency mismatch.
Institutions shall assign a risk weight of 10 %, to the extent of the collateralisation, to the exposure values of such transactions collateralised by debt securities issued by central governments or central banks which are assigned a 0 % risk weight under Chapter 2.
6.   For transactions other than those referred to in paragraphs 4 and 5, institutions may assign a 0 % risk weight where the exposure and the collateral are denominated in the same currency, and either of the following conditions is met:
(a)
the collateral is cash on deposit or a cash assimilated instrument;
(b)
the collateral is in the form of debt securities issued by central governments or central banks eligible for a 0 % risk weight under Article 114, and its market value has been discounted by 20 %.
7.   For the purpose of paragraphs 5 and 6 debt securities issued by central governments or central banks shall include:
(a)
debt securities issued by regional governments or local authorities exposures to which are treated as exposures to the central government in whose jurisdiction they are established under Article 115;
(b)
debt securities issued by multilateral development banks to which a 0 % risk weight is assigned under or by virtue of Article 117(2);
(c)
debt securities issued by international organisations which are assigned a 0 % risk weight under Article 118;
(d)
debt securities issued by public sector entities which are treated as exposures to central governments in accordance with Article 116(4).
