Article 18
Methods for prudential consolidation
1.   The institutions that are required to comply with the requirements referred to in Section 1 on the basis of their consolidated situation shall carry out a full consolidation of all institutions and financial institutions that are its subsidiaries or, where relevant, the subsidiaries of the same parent financial holding company or mixed parent financial holding company. Paragraphs 2 to 8 of this Article shall not apply where Part Six applies on the basis of an institution's consolidated situation.
2.   However, the competent authorities may on a case-by-case basis permit proportional consolidation according to the share of capital that the parent undertaking holds in the subsidiary. Proportional consolidation may only be permitted where all of the following conditions are fulfilled:
(a)
the liability of the parent undertaking is limited to the share of capital that the parent undertaking holds in the subsidiary in view of the liability of the other shareholders or members;
(b)
the solvency of those other shareholders or members is satisfactory;
(c)
the liability of the other shareholders and members is clearly established in a legally binding way.
3.   Where undertakings are linked by a relationship within the meaning of Article 12(1) of Directive 83/349/EEC, the competent authorities shall determine how consolidation is to be carried out.
4.   The consolidating supervisor shall require the proportional consolidation according to the share of capital held of participations in institutions and financial institutions managed by an undertaking included in the consolidation together with one or more undertakings not included in the consolidation, where those undertakings' liability is limited to the share of the capital they hold.
5.   In the case of participations or capital ties other than those referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2, the competent authorities shall determine whether and how consolidation is to be carried out. In particular, they may permit or require use of the equity method. That method shall not, however, constitute inclusion of the undertakings concerned in supervision on a consolidated basis.
6.   The competent authorities shall determine whether and how consolidation is to be carried out in the following cases:
(a)
where, in the opinion of the competent authorities, an institution exercises a significant influence over one or more institutions or financial institutions, but without holding a participation or other capital ties in these institutions; and
(b)
where two or more institutions or financial institutions are placed under single management other than pursuant to a contract or clauses of their memoranda or Articles of association.
In particular, the competent authorities may permit, or require use of, the method provided for in Article 12 of Directive 83/349/EEC. That method shall not, however, constitute inclusion of the undertakings concerned in consolidated supervision.
7.   EBA shall develop draft regulatory technical standards to specify conditions according to which consolidation shall be carried out in the cases referred to in paragraphs 2 to 6 of this Article.
EBA shall submit those draft regulatory technical standards to the Commission by 31 December 2016.
Power is delegated to the Commission to adopt the regulatory technical standards referred to in the first subparagraph in accordance with Articles 10 to 14 of Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010.
8.   Where consolidated supervision is required pursuant to Article 111 of Directive 2013/36/EU, ancillary services undertakings and asset management companies as defined in point (5) of Article 2 of Directive 2002/87/EC shall be included in consolidations in the cases, and in accordance with the methods, laid down in this Article.
