Article 314
Combined use of different approaches
1.   Institutions may use a combination of approaches provided that they obtain permission from the competent authorities. Competent authorities shall grant such permission where the requirements set out in paragraphs 2 to 4, as applicable, are met.
2.   An institution may use an Advanced Measurement Approach in combination with either the Basic Indicator Approach or the Standardised Approach, where both of the following conditions are met:
(a)
the combination of Approaches used by the institution captures all its operational risks and competent authorities are satisfied with the methodology used by the institution to cover different activities, geographical locations, legal structures or other relevant divisions determined on an internal basis;
(b)
the criteria set out in Article 320 and the standards set out in Articles 321 and 322 are fulfilled for the part of activities covered by the Standardised Approach and the Advanced Measurement Approaches respectively.
3.   For institutions that want to use an Advanced Measurement Approach in combination with either the Basic Indicator Approach or the Standardised Approach competent authorities shall impose the following additional conditions for granting permission:
(a)
on the date of implementation of an Advanced Measurement Approach, a significant part of the institution's operational risks are captured by that Approach;
(b)
the institution takes a commitment to apply the Advanced Measurement Approach across a material part of its operations within a time schedule that was submitted to and approved by its competent authorities.
4.   An institution may request permission from a competent authority to use a combination of the Basic Indicator Approach and the Standardised Approach only in exceptional circumstances such as the recent acquisition of new business which may require a transition period for the application of the Standardised Approach.
A competent authority shall grant such permission only where the institution has committed to apply the Standardised Approach within a time schedule that was submitted to and approved by the competent authority.
5.   EBA shall develop draft regulatory technical standards to specify the following:
(a)
the conditions that competent authorities shall use when assessing the methodology referred to in point (a) of paragraph 2;
(b)
the conditions that the competent authorities shall use when deciding whether to impose the additional conditions referred to in paragraph 3.
EBA shall submit those draft regulatory technical standards to the Commission by 31 December 2016.
Power is delegated to the Commission to adopt the regulatory technical standards referred to in the first subparagraph in accordance with Articles 10 to 14 of Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010.
