Article 99
Reporting on own funds requirements and financial information
1.   Reporting by institutions to the competent authorities on the obligations laid down in Article 92 shall be carried out at least on a semi-annual basis.
2.   Institutions subject to Article 4 of Regulation (EC) No 1606/2002 and credit institutions other than those referred to in Article 4 of that Regulation that prepare their consolidated accounts in conformity with the international accounting standards adopted in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 6(2) of that Regulation, shall also report financial information.
3.   Competent authorities may require those credit institutions applying international accounting standards as applicable under Regulation (EC) No 1606/2002 for the reporting of own funds on a consolidated basis pursuant to Article 24(2) of this Regulation to also report financial information as laid down in paragraph 2 of this Article.
4.   The financial information referred to in paragraph 2 and in the first subparagraph of paragraph 3 shall be reported to the extent this is necessary to obtain a comprehensive view of the risk profile of an institution's activities and a view on the systemic risks posed by institutions to the financial sector or the real economy in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010.
5.   EBA shall develop draft implementing technical standards to specify the uniform formats, frequencies, dates of reporting, definitions and the IT solutions to be applied in the Union for the reporting referred to in paragraphs 1 to 4.
The reporting requirements shall be proportionate to the nature, scale and complexity of the activities of the institutions.
EBA shall submit those draft implementing technical standards to the Commission by 1 February 2015.
Power is conferred on the Commission to adopt the implementing technical standards referred to in the first subparagraph in accordance with Article 15 of Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010.
6.   Where a competent authority considers that the financial information required by paragraph 2 is necessary to obtain a comprehensive view of the risk profile of the activities of, and a view of the systemic risks to the financial sector or the real economy posed by, institutions other than those referred to in paragraphs2 and 3 that are subject to an accounting framework based on Directive 86/635/EEC, the competent authority shall consult EBA on the extension of the reporting requirements of financial information on a consolidated basis to those institutions, provided that they are not already reporting on such a basis.
EBA shall develop draft implementing technical standards to specify the formats to be used by institutions to which the competent authorities may extend the reporting requirements in accordance with the first subparagraph.
EBA shall submit those draft implementing technical standards to the Commission by 1 February 2015.
Power is conferred on the Commission to adopt the implementing technical standards referred to in the second subparagraph in accordance with Article 15 of Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010.
7.   Where a competent authority considers information not covered by the implementing technical standards referred to in paragraph 5 to be necessary for the purposes set out in paragraph 4, it shall notify EBA and the ESRB about the additional information it deems necessary to include in the implementing technical standards referred to in paragraph 5.
