Article 289
Use test
1.   Institutions shall ensure that the distribution of exposures generated by the model used to calculate effective EPE is closely integrated into the day-to-day CCR management process of the institution, and that the output of the model is taken into account in the process of credit approval, CCR management, internal capital allocation and corporate governance.
2.   The institution shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the competent authorities that it has been using a model to calculate the distribution of exposures upon which the EPE calculation is based that meets, broadly, the requirements set out in this Section for at least one year prior to permission to use the IMM by the competent authorities in accordance with Article 283.
3.   The model used to generate a distribution of exposures to CCR shall be part of the CCR management framework required by Article 286. This framework shall include the measurement of usage of credit lines, aggregating CCR exposures with other credit exposures and internal capital allocation.
4.   In addition to EPE, an institution shall measure and manage current exposures. Where appropriate, the institution shall measure current exposure gross and net of collateral. The use test is satisfied if an institution uses other CCR measures, such as peak exposure, based on the distribution of exposures generated by the same model to compute EPE.
5.   An institution shall have the systems capability to estimate EE daily if necessary, unless it demonstrates to the satisfaction of its competent authorities that its exposures to CCR warrant less frequent calculation. The institution shall estimate EE along a time profile of forecasting horizons that adequately reflects the time structure of future cash flows and maturity of the contracts and in a manner that is consistent with the materiality and composition of the exposures.
6.   Exposure shall be measured, monitored and controlled over the life of all contracts in the netting set and not only to the one-year horizon. The institution shall have procedures in place to identify and control the risks for counterparties where the exposure rises beyond the one-year horizon. The forecast increase in exposure shall be an input into the institution's internal capital model.
