Article 245
Calculation of risk-weighted exposure amounts
1.   Where an originator institution has transferred significant credit risk associated with securitised exposures in accordance with Section 2, that institution may:
(a)
in the case of a traditional securitisation, exclude from its calculation of risk-weighted exposure amounts, and, as relevant, expected loss amounts, the exposures which it has securitised;
(b)
in the case of a synthetic securitisation, calculate risk-weighted exposure amounts, and, as relevant, expected loss amounts, in respect of the securitised exposures in accordance with Articles 249 and 250.
2.   Where the originator institution has decided to apply paragraph 1, it shall calculate the risk-weighted exposure amounts prescribed in this Chapter for the positions that it may hold in the securitisation.
Where the originator institution has not transferred significant credit risk or has decided not to apply paragraph 1, it need not calculate risk-weighted exposure amounts for any positions it may have in the securitisation in question but shall continue including the securitised exposures in its calculation of risk-weighted exposure amounts as if they had not been securitised.
3.   Where there is an exposure to different tranches in a securitisation, the exposure to each tranche shall be considered a separate securitisation position. The providers of credit protection to securitisation positions shall be considered to hold positions in the securitisation. Securitisation positions shall include exposures to a securitisation arising from interest rate or currency derivative contracts.
4.   Unless a securitisation position is deducted from Common Equity Tier 1 items pursuant to Article 36(1)(k), the risk-weighted exposure amount shall be included in the institution's total of risk-weighted exposure amounts for the purposes of Article 92(3).
5.   The risk-weighted exposure amount of a securitisation position shall be calculated by applying to the exposure value of the position, calculated as set out in Article 246, the relevant total risk weight.
6.   The total risk weight shall be determined as the sum of the risk weight set out in this Chapter and any additional risk weight in accordance with Article 407.
