Article 304
Treatment of clearing members' exposures to clients
1.   Where an institution acts as a clearing member and, in that capacity, acts as a financial intermediary between a client and a CCP, it shall calculate the own funds requirements for its CCP-related transactions with the client in accordance with Sections 1 to 8 of this Chapter and with Title VI of Part Three, as applicable.
2.   Where an institution acting as a clearing member enters into a contractual arrangement with a client of another clearing member that facilitates, in accordance with Article 48(5) and (6), of Regulation (EU) No 648/2012, the transfer of positions and collateral referred to in Article 305(2)(b) of this Regulation for that client, and that contractual agreement gives rise to a contingent obligation for that institution, that institution may attribute an exposure value of zero to that contingent obligation.
3.   An institution acting as a clearing member may apply a shorter margin period of risk when calculating the own fund requirement for its exposures to a client in accordance with the Internal Model Method. The margin period of risk applied by the institution shall not be less than five days.
4.   An institution acting as a clearing member may multiply its EAD by a scalar when calculating the own fund requirement for its exposures to a client in accordance with the Mark-to-Market Method, the Standardised Method or the Original Exposure Method. The scalars that the institutions may apply are the following:
(a)
0,71 for a margin period of risk of five days;
(b)
0,77 for a margin period of risk of six days;
(c)
0,84 for a margin period of risk of seven days;
(d)
0,89 for a margin period of risk of eight days;
(e)
0,95 for a margin period of risk of nine days;
(f)
1 for a margin period of risk of ten days or more.
5.   EBA shall develop draft regulatory technical standards to specify the margin periods of risk that institutions may use for the purposes of paragraphs 3 and 4.
When developing those draft regulatory technical standards, EBA shall apply the following principles:
(a)
it shall define the margin period of risk for each of the types of contracts and transactions listed in Article 301(1);
(b)
the margin periods of risk to be defined in point (a) shall reflect the close-out period of the contracts and transactions referred to in that point.
EBA shall submit those draft regulatory technical standards to the Commission by 30 June 2014.
Power is delegated to the Commission to adopt the regulatory technical standards referred to in the first subparagraph in accordance with Articles 10 to 14 of Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010.
