Article 316
Relevant indicator
1.   For institutions applying accounting standards established by Directive 86/635/EEC, based on the accounting categories for the profit and loss account of institutions under Article 27 of that Directive, the relevant indicator is the sum of the elements listed in Table 1 of this paragraph. Institutions shall include each element in the sum with its positive or negative sign.

Table 1

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Institutions shall adjust these elements to reflect the following qualifications:
(a)
institutions shall calculate the relevant indicator before the deduction of any provisions and operating expenses. Institutions shall include in operating expenses fees paid for outsourcing services rendered by third parties which are not a parent or subsidiary of the institution or a subsidiary of a parent which is also the parent of the institution. Institutions may use expenditure on the outsourcing of services rendered by third parties to reduce the relevant indicator where the expenditure is incurred from an undertaking subject to rules under, or equivalent to, this Regulation;
(b)
institutions shall not use the following elements in the calculation of the relevant indicator:
(i)
realised profits/losses from the sale of non-trading book items;
(ii)
income from extraordinary or irregular items;
(iii)
income derived from insurance.
(c)
when revaluation of trading items is part of the profit and loss statement, institutions may include revaluation. When institutions apply Article 36(2) of Directive 86/635/EEC, they shall include revaluation booked in the profit and loss account.
2.   When institutions apply accounting standards different from those established by Directive 86/635/EEC, they shall calculate the relevant indicator on the basis of data that best reflect the definition set out in this Article.
3.   EBA shall develop draft regulatory technical standards to determine the methodology to calculate the relevant indicator referred to in paragraph 2.
EBA shall submit those draft regulatory technical standards to the Commission by 31 December 2017.
Power is delegated to the Commission to adopt the regulatory technical standards referred to in the first subparagraph in accordance with Articles 10 to 14 of Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010.
