Article 247
Recognition of credit risk mitigation for securitisation positions
1.   An institution may recognise funded or unfunded credit protection obtained in respect of a securitisation position in accordance with Chapter 4 and subject to the requirements laid down in this Chapter and in Chapter 4.
Eligible funded credit protection is limited to financial collateral which is eligible for the calculation of risk-weighted exposure amounts under Chapter 2 as laid down under Chapter 4 and recognition is subject to compliance with the relevant requirements as laid down under Chapter 4.
2.   Eligible unfunded credit protection and unfunded credit protection providers are limited to those which are eligible under Chapter 4 and recognition is subject to compliance with the relevant requirements laid down under Chapter 4.
3.   By way of derogation from paragraph 2, the eligible providers of unfunded credit protection listed in points (a) to (h) of Article 201(1) except for qualifying central counterparties shall have a credit assessment by a recognised ECAI which has been determined to be associated with credit quality step 3 or above under Article 136 and shall have been associated with credit quality step 2 or above at the time the credit protection was first recognised. Institutions that have a permission to apply the IRB Approach to a direct exposure to the protection provider may assess eligibility according to the first sentence based on the equivalence of the PD for the protection provider to the PD associated with the credit quality steps referred to in Article 136.
4.   By way of derogation from paragraph 2, SSPEs are eligible protection providers where they own assets that qualify as eligible financial collateral and to which there are no rights or contingent rights preceding or ranking pari passu to the contingent rights of the institution receiving unfunded credit protection and all requirements for the recognition of financial collateral in Chapter 4 are fulfilled. In those cases, GA (the amount of the protection adjusted for any currency mismatch and maturity mismatch in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 4) shall be limited to the volatility adjusted market value of those assets and g (the risk weight of exposures to the protection provider as specified under the Standardised Approach) shall be determined as the weighted-average risk weight that would apply to those assets as financial collateral under the Standardised Approach.
