Article 256
Additional own funds requirements for securitisations of revolving exposures with early amortisation provisions
1.   Where there is a securitisation of revolving exposures subject to an early amortisation provision, the originator institution shall calculate an additional risk-weighted exposure amount in respect of the risk that the levels of credit risk to which it is exposed may increase following the operation of the early amortisation provision, in accordance with this Article.
2.   The institution shall calculate a risk-weighted exposure amount in respect of the sum of the exposure values of the originator's interest and the investors' interest.
For securitisation structures where the securitised exposures comprise revolving and non-revolving exposures, an originator institution shall apply the treatment set out in paragraphs 3 to 6 to that portion of the underlying pool containing revolving exposures.
The exposure value of the originator's interest shall be the exposure value of that notional part of a pool of drawn amounts sold into a securitisation, the proportion of which in relation to the amount of the total pool sold into the structure determines the proportion of the cash flows generated by principal and interest collections and other associated amounts which are not available to make payments to those having securitisation positions in the securitisation. The originator's interest shall not be subordinate to the investors' interest. The exposure value of the investors' interest shall be the exposure value of the remaining notional part of the pool of drawn amounts.
The risk-weighted exposure amount in respect of the exposure value of the originator's interest shall be calculated as that for a pro rata exposure to the securitised exposures as if they had not been securitised.
3.   Originators of the following types of securitisation are exempt from the calculation of an additional risk-weighted exposure amount in paragraph 1:
(a)
securitisations of revolving exposures whereby investors remain fully exposed to all future draws by borrowers so that the risk on the underlying facilities does not return to the originator institution even after an early amortisation event has occurred;
(b)
securitisations where any early amortisation provision is solely triggered by events not related to the performance of the securitised assets or the originator institution, such as material changes in tax laws or regulations.
4.   For an originator institution subject to the calculation of an additional risk-weighted exposure amount in accordance with paragraph 1 the total of the risk-weighted exposure amounts in respect of its positions in the investors' interest and the risk-weighted exposure amounts calculated under paragraph 1 shall be no greater than the greater of:
(a)
the risk-weighted exposure amounts calculated in respect of its positions in the investors' interest;
(b)
the risk-weighted exposure amounts that would be calculated in respect of the securitised exposures by an institution holding the exposures as if they had not been securitised in an amount equal to the investors' interest.
Deduction of net gains, if any, arising from the capitalisation of future income required under Article 32(1), shall be treated outside the maximum amount indicated in the preceding subparagraph.
5.   The risk-weighted exposure amount to be calculated in accordance with paragraph 1 shall be determined by multiplying the exposure value of the investors' interest by the product of the appropriate conversion factor as indicated in paragraphs 6 to 9 and the weighted average risk weight that would apply to the securitised exposures if the exposures had not been securitised.
An early amortisation provision shall be considered to be controlled where all of the following conditions are met:
(a)
the originator institution has an appropriate own funds/liquidity plan in place to ensure that it has sufficient own funds and liquidity available in the event of an early amortisation;
(b)
throughout the duration of the transaction there is pro-rata sharing between the originator's interest and the investor's interest of payments of interest and principal, expenses, losses and recoveries based on the balance of receivables outstanding at one or more reference points during each month;
(c)
the amortisation period is considered sufficient for 90 % of the total debt (originator's and investors' interest) outstanding at the beginning of the early amortisation period to have been repaid or recognised as in default;
(d)
the speed of repayment is no more rapid than would be achieved by straight-line amortisation over the period set out in point (c).
6.   In the case of securitisations subject to an early amortisation provision of retail exposures which are uncommitted and unconditionally cancellable without prior notice, where the early amortisation is triggered by the excess spread level falling to a specified level, institutions shall compare the three-month average excess spread level with the excess spread levels at which excess spread is required to be trapped.
Where the securitisation does not require excess spread to be trapped, the trapping point is deemed to be 4,5 percentage points greater than the excess spread level at which an early amortisation is triggered.
The conversion factor to be applied shall be determined by the level of the actual three month average excess spread in accordance with Table 2.

Table 2

 
Securitisations subject to a controlled early amortisation provision
Securitisations subject to a non-controlled early amortisation provision
Three months average excess spread
Conversion factor
Conversion factor
Above level A
0  %
0  %
Level A
1  %
5  %
Level B
2  %
15  %
Level C
10  %
50  %
Level D
20  %
100  %
Level E
40  %
100  %
Where:
(a)
‧Level A‧ refers to levels of excess spread less than 133,33 % of the trapping level of excess spread but not less than 100 % of that trapping level;
(b)
‧Level B‧ refers to levels of excess spread less than 100 % of the trapping level of excess spread but not less than 75 % of that trapping level;
(c)
‧Level C‧ refers to levels of excess spread less than 75 % of the trapping level of excess spread but not less than 50 % of that trapping level;
(d)
‧Level D‧ refers to levels of excess spread less than 50 % of the trapping level of excess spread but not less than 25 % of that trapping level;
(e)
‧Level E‧ refers to levels of excess spread less than 25 % of the trapping level of excess spread.
7.   In the case of securitisations subject to an early amortization provision of retail exposures which are uncommitted and unconditionally cancellable without prior notice and where the early amortization is triggered by a quantitative value in respect of something other than the three months average excess spread, subject to permission by the competent authorities, institutions may apply a treatment which approximates closely to that prescribed in paragraph 6 for determining the conversion factor indicated. The competent authority shall grant permission, if the following conditions are met:
(a)
that treatment is more appropriate because the institution can establish a quantitative measure equivalent, in relation to the quantitative value triggering early amortisation, to the trapping level of excess spread;
(b)
that treatment leads to a measure of the risk that the credit risk to which the institution is exposed may increase following the operation of the early amortisation provision that is as prudent as that calculated in accordance with paragraph 6.
8.   All other securitisations subject to a controlled early amortisation provision of revolving exposures shall be subject to a conversion factor of 90 %.
9.   All other securitisations subject to a non-controlled early amortisation provision of revolving exposures shall be subject to a conversion factor of 100 %.
