Article 1
Regulation (EU) No 691/2011 is amended as follows:
(1)
in Article 2, the following points are added:
‘(4)
“environmental protection expenditure” means the economic resources devoted by resident units to environmental protection. Environmental protection includes all activities and actions which have as their main purpose the prevention, reduction and elimination of pollution and of any other degradation of the environment. Those activities and actions include all measures taken in order to restore the environment after it has been degraded. Activities which, while beneficial to the environment, primarily satisfy the technical needs or the internal requirements for hygiene or safety and security of an enterprise or other institution are excluded from this definition;
(5)
“environmental goods and services sector” means the production activities of a national economy that generate environmental products (environmental goods and services). Environmental products are products that have been produced for the purpose of environmental protection, as referred to in point (4), and resource management. Resource management includes the preservation, maintenance and enhancement of the stock of natural resources and therefore the safeguarding of those resources against depletion;
(6)
“physical energy flow accounts” means consistent compilations of the physical energy flows into national economies, the flows circulating within the economy and the outputs to other economies or to the environment.’;
(2)
Article 3 is amended as follows:
(a)
in paragraph 1, the following points are added:
‘(d)
a module for environmental protection expenditure accounts, as set out in Annex IV;
(e)
a module for environmental goods and services sector accounts, as set out in Annex V;
(f)
a module for physical energy flow accounts, as set out in Annex VI.’;
(b)
the following paragraphs are added:
‘4.   The Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 9 in order to specify the energy products referred to in Section 3 of Annex VI, based on the lists set out in the Annexes to Regulation (EC) No 1099/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council (*1).
Such delegated acts shall not impose a significant additional burden on the Member States or on the respondents. When establishing and subsequently updating the lists referred to in the first subparagraph, the Commission shall duly justify the actions, using, where appropriate, input from relevant experts on a cost-effectiveness analysis, including an assessment of the burden on respondents and of the production costs.
5.   In order to facilitate a uniform application of Annex V, the Commission shall, by 31 December 2015, by means of implementing acts, establish an indicative compendium of environmental goods and services and of the economic activities to be covered by Annex V based on the following categories: environmental specific services, environmental sole purpose products (connected products), adapted goods and environmental technologies. The Commission shall update the compendium where necessary.
The implementing acts referred to in the first subparagraph shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 11(2);

(*1)  Regulation (EC) No 1099/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 October 2008 on energy statistics (OJ L 304, 14.11.2008, p. 1).’."
                        
(3)
Article 8(2) is replaced by the following:
‘2.   For the purposes of obtaining a derogation under paragraph 1 for Annexes I, II and III, the Member State concerned shall present a duly justified request to the Commission by 12 November 2011. For the purposes of obtaining a derogation under paragraph 1 for Annexes IV, V and VI, the Member State concerned shall present a duly justified request to the Commission by 17 September 2014.’;
(4)
Article 9 is amended as follows:
(a)
paragraph 2 is replaced by the following:
‘2.   The power to adopt delegated acts referred to in Article 3(3) and (4) shall be conferred on the Commission for a period of five years from 11 August 2011. The Commission shall draw up a report in respect of the delegation of power not later than nine months before the end of the 5-year period. The delegation of power shall be tacitly extended for periods of an identical duration, unless the European Parliament or the Council opposes such extension not later than three months before the end of each period.’;
(b)
paragraph 3 is replaced by the following:
‘3.   The delegation of power referred to in Article 3(3) and (4) may be revoked at any time by the European Parliament or by the Council. A decision to revoke shall put an end to the delegation of the power specified in that decision. It shall take effect the day following the publication of the decision in the Official Journal of the European Union or at a later date specified therein. It shall not affect the validity of any delegated acts already in force.’;
(c)
paragraph 5 is replaced by the following:
‘5.   A delegated act adopted pursuant to Article 3(3) and (4) shall enter into force only if no objection has been expressed either by the European Parliament or the Council within a period of two months of notification of that act to the European Parliament and the Council or if, before the expiry of that period, the European Parliament and the Council have both informed the Commission that they will not object. That period shall be extended by two months at the initiative of the European Parliament or the Council.’;
(5)
Annexes IV, V and VI, as set out in the Annex to this Regulation, are added to Regulation (EU) No 691/2011.
