Article 28
1. Before submitting the application for recognition of a marketing authorization, the holder of the authorization shall inform the Member State which granted the authorization on which the application is based (hereinafter "reference Member State"), that an application is to be made in accordance with this Directive and shall notify it of any additions to the original dossier; that Member State may require the applicant to provide it with all the particulars and documents necessary to enable it to check that the dossiers filed are identical.
In addition the holder of the authorization shall request the reference Member State to prepare an assessment report in respect of the medicinal product concerned, or, if necessary, to update any existing assessment report. That Member State shall prepare the assessment report, or update it, within 90 days of the receipt of the request.
At the same time as the application is submitted in accordance with paragraph 2, the reference Member State shall forward the assessment report to the Member State or Member States concerned by the application.
2. In order to obtain the recognition according to the procedures laid down in this Chapter in one or more of the Member States of a marketing authorization issued by a Member State, the holder of the authorization shall submit an application to the competent authorities of the Member State or Member States concerned, together with the information and particulars referred to in Articles 8, 10(1) and 11. He shall testify that the dossier is identical to that accepted by the reference Member State, or shall identify any additions or amendments it may contain. In the latter case, he shall certify that the summary of the product characteristics proposed by him in accordance with Article 11 is identical to that accepted by the reference Member State in accordance with Article 21. Moreover, he shall certify that all the dossiers filed as part of the procedure are identical.
3. The holder of the marketing authorization shall communicate the application to the Agency, inform it of the Member States concerned and of the dates of submission of the application and send it a copy of the authorization granted by the reference Member State. He shall also send the Agency copies of any such authorization which may have been granted by the other Member States in respect of the medicinal product concerned, and shall indicate whether any application for authorization is currently under consideration in any Member State.
4. Save in the exceptional case provided for in Article 29(1), each Member State shall recognize the marketing authorization granted by the reference Member State within 90 days of receipt of the application and the assessment report. It shall inform the reference Member State which granted the initial authorization, the other Member States concerned by the application, the Agency, and the marketing authorization holder.

