Article 8
1. In order to obtain an authorization to place a medicinal product on the market regardless of the procedure established by Regulation (EEC) No 2309/93, an application shall be made to the competent authority of the Member State concerned.
2. A marketing authorization may only be granted to an applicant established in the Community.
3. The application shall be accompanied by the following particulars and documents, submitted in accordance with Annex I:
(a) Name or corporate name and permanent address of the applicant and, where applicable, of the manufacturer.
(b) Name of the medicinal product.
(c) Qualitative and quantitative particulars of all the constituents of the medicinal product in usual terminology, but excluding empirical chemical formulae, with mention of the international non-proprietary name recommended by the World Health Organization where such name exists.
(d) Description of the manufacturing method.
(e) Therapeutic indications, contra-indications and adverse reactions.
(f) Posology, pharmaceutical form, method and route of administration and expected shelf life.
(g) If applicable, reasons for any precautionary and safety measures to be taken for the storage of the medicinal product, its administration to patients and for the disposal of waste products, together with an indication of any potential risks presented by the medicinal product for the environment.
(h) Description of the control methods employed by the manufacturer (qualitative and quantitative analysis of the constituents and of the finished product, special tests, e.g. sterility tests, tests for the presence of pyrogenic substances, the presence of heavy metals, stability tests, biological and toxicity tests, controls carried out at an intermediate stage of the manufacturing process).
(i) Results of:
- physico-chemical, biological or microbiological tests,
- toxicological and pharmacological tests,
- clinical trials.
(j) A summary, in accordance with Article 11, of the product characteristics, one or more specimens or mock-ups of the outer packaging and the immediate packaging of the medicinal product, together with a package leaflet.
(k) A document showing that the manufacturer is authorised in his own country to produce medicinal products.
(l) Copies of any authorisation obtained in another Member State or in a third country to place the medicinal product on the market, together with a list of those Member States in which an application for authorisation submitted in accordance with this Directive is under examination. Copies of the summary of the product characteristics proposed by the applicant in accordance with Article 11 or approved by the competent authorities of the Member State in accordance with Article 21. Copies of the package leaflet proposed in accordance with Article 59 or approved by the competent authorities of the Member State in accordance with Article 61. Details of any decision to refuse authorization, whether in the Community or in a third country, and the reasons for such a decision.
This information shall be updated on a regular basis.

