Article 2
Objectives and eligibility criteria
1.   Within the framework of the principles and objectives of the Union's external action and of the European Consensus and agreed modifications thereto:
(a)
the primary objective of cooperation under this Regulation shall be the reduction and, in the long term, the eradication of poverty;
(b)
consistently with the primary objective referred to in point (a), cooperation under this Regulation shall contribute to:
(i)
fostering sustainable economic, social and environmental development, and
(ii)
consolidating and supporting democracy, the rule of law, good governance, human rights and the relevant principles of international law.
The achievement of the objectives referred to in the first subparagraph shall be measured using relevant indicators, including human development indicators, in particular MDG 1 for point (a) and MDGs 1 to 8 for point (b) and, after 2015, other indicators agreed at international level by the Union and the Member States.
2.   Cooperation under this Regulation shall contribute to the achievement of the international commitments and objectives in the field of development that the Union has agreed to, in particular the MDGs, and post-2015 new development targets.
3.   Actions under geographic programmes shall be designed so as to fulfil the criteria for ODA established by the OECD/DAC.
Actions under the thematic programmes and the Pan-African programme shall be designed so as to fulfil the criteria for ODA established by the OECD/DAC, unless:
(a)
the action applies to a beneficiary country or territory that does not qualify as an ODA recipient country or territory according to the OECD/DAC; or
(b)
the action implements a global initiative, a Union policy priority or an international obligation or commitment of the Union, as referred to in points (b) and (e) of Article 6(2), and the action does not have the characteristics to fulfil the criteria for ODA.
4.   Without prejudice to point (a) of paragraph 3, at least 95 % of the expenditure foreseen under the thematic programmes and at least 90 % of the expenditure foreseen under the Pan-African programme shall fulfil the criteria for ODA established by the OECD/DAC.
5.   Actions covered by Council Regulation (EC) No 1257/96 (15) and eligible for funding under that Regulation shall not be funded under this Regulation, except where there is a need to ensure continuity of cooperation from crisis to stable conditions for development. In such cases, special consideration shall be given to ensuring that humanitarian relief, rehabilitation and development assistance are effectively linked.
