Article 11
Programming documents for geographic programmes
1.   The preparation, implementation and review of all programming documents under this Article shall comply with the principles of policy coherence for development and those of aid effectiveness, namely democratic ownership, partnership, coordination, harmonisation, alignment with partner country or regional systems, transparency, mutual accountability and results orientation as laid down in Article 3(4) to (8). Where possible, the programming period shall be synchronised with partner country strategy cycles.
Programming documents for geographic programmes, including joint programming documents, shall be based, to the extent possible, on a dialogue between the Union, the Member States and the partner country or region concerned, including national and regional parliaments, and shall involve civil society and local authorities and other parties so as to enhance ownership of the process and to encourage support for national development strategies, particularly for those aimed at reducing poverty.
2.   Strategy papers shall be drawn up by the Union for the partner country or region concerned to provide a coherent framework for development cooperation between the Union and that partner country or region, consistent with the overall purpose and scope, objectives, principles and policy provisions set out in this Regulation.
3.   No strategy paper shall be required for:
(a)
countries having a national development strategy in the form of a national development plan or a similar development document accepted by the Commission as a basis for the corresponding multiannual indicative programme, at the time of adoption of the latter document;
(b)
countries or regions for which a joint framework document laying down a comprehensive Union strategy, including a specific chapter on development policy, has been drawn up;
(c)
countries or regions for which a joint multiannual programming document between the Union and Member States has been agreed;
(d)
regions having a jointly agreed strategy with the Union;
(e)
countries where the Union intends to synchronise its strategy with a new national cycle starting before 1 January 2017; in such cases the multiannual indicative programme for the interim period between 1 January 2014 and the beginning of the new national cycle shall contain the Union's response for that country;
(f)
countries or regions receiving an allocation of Union funds under this Regulation not exceeding EUR 50 000 000 for the 2014-2020 period.
In the cases referred to in points (b) and (f) of the first subparagraph, the multiannual indicative programme for the country or region concerned shall contain the Union's development strategy for that country or region.
4.   Strategy papers shall be reviewed at their mid-term or on an ad hoc basis as necessary, in accordance, as appropriate, with the principles and procedures laid down in the partnership and cooperation agreements concluded with the partner country or region concerned.
5.   Multiannual indicative programmes for geographic programmes shall be drawn up for each of the countries or regions receiving an indicative financial allocation of Union funds under this Regulation. Except for countries or regions referred to in points (e) and (f) of the first subparagraph of paragraph 3, those documents shall be drawn up on the basis of the strategy papers or equivalent documents as referred to in paragraph 3.
For the purpose of this Regulation, the joint multiannual programming document referred to in point (c) of the first subparagraph of paragraph 3 of this Article may be considered as the multiannual indicative programme, provided that it complies with the principles and conditions established in this paragraph, including an indicative allocation of funds, and with the procedures provided for in Article 15.
Multiannual indicative programmes for geographic programmes shall set out the priority areas selected for Union financing, the specific objectives, the expected results, clear, specific and transparent performance indicators, the indicative financial allocations, both overall and per priority area and, where applicable, aid modalities.
The Commission shall adopt the multiannual indicative financial allocations within each geographic programme in accordance with the general principles of this Regulation, based on the criteria laid down in Article 3(2), and taking into account, alongside the specificity of the different programmes, the particular difficulties faced by countries or regions that are in crisis, are vulnerable, fragile, in conflict or are disaster prone.
Where appropriate, the financial allocations may be given in the form of a range and/or some funds may be left unallocated. No indicative financial allocations may be foreseen beyond the period 2014-2020, unless they are specifically subject to the availability of resources beyond that period.
The multiannual indicative programmes for geographic programmes may be reviewed where necessary, including for effective implementation, taking into account mid-term or ad hoc reviews of the strategy document on which they are based.
Indicative financial allocations, priorities, specific objectives, expected results, performance indicators and, where applicable, aid modalities may also be adapted as a result of reviews, in particular following a crisis or post-crisis situation.
Such reviews should cover needs as well as the commitment and progress with regard to agreed objectives for development, including those referring to human rights, democracy, the rule of law and good governance.
6.   The Commission shall report on joint programming with Member States in the mid-term review report referred to in Article 17 of Regulation (EU) No 236/2014 and shall include recommendations in cases where joint programming was not fully achieved.
