Article 10
General framework
1.   For geographic programmes, multiannual indicative programmes for partner countries and regions shall be drawn up on the basis of a strategy document as provided for in Article 11.
For thematic programmes, multiannual indicative programmes shall be drawn up as provided for in Article 13.
The Pan-African multiannual indicative programme shall be drawn up as provided for in Article 14.
2.   The Commission shall adopt the implementing measures referred to in Article 2 of Regulation (EU) No 236/2014 on the basis of the programming documents referred to in Articles 11, 13 and 14 of this Regulation.
3.   Union support may also take the form of measures not covered in the programming documents referred to in Articles 11, 13 and 14 of this Regulation, as provided for in Article 2 of Regulation (EU) No 236/2014.
4.   The Union and the Member States shall consult each other at an early stage of and throughout the programming process in order to promote coherence, complementarity and consistency among their cooperation activities. Such consultation may lead to joint programming between the Union and the Member States. The Union shall also consult other donors and development actors, including representatives of civil society, local authorities and other implementing bodies. The European Parliament shall be informed.
5.   Programming under this Regulation shall have due regard to human rights and democracy in partner countries.
6.   Funds provided for by this Regulation may be left unallocated in order to ensure an appropriate response of the Union in the event of unforeseen circumstances, in particular in fragile, crisis and post-crisis situations, as well as to allow for the synchronisation with partner countries' strategy cycles and the modification of indicative financial allocations as a result of the reviews carried out pursuant to Article 11(5), Article 13(2) and Article 14(3). Subject to their subsequent allocation or re-allocation in accordance with the procedures provided for in Article 15, the use of those funds shall be decided at a later date in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 236/2014.
The part of funds left unallocated at the level of each type of programme shall not exceed 5 %, except for the purpose of synchronisation and for countries referred to in Article 12(1).
7.   Without prejudice to Article 2(3), the Commission may include a specific financial allocation to assist partner countries and regions in strengthening their cooperation with neighbouring Union outermost regions.
8.   Any programming or review of programmes taking place after the publication of the mid-term review report referred to in Article 17 of Regulation (EU) No 236/2014 shall take into account the results, findings and conclusions of that report.
