Article 3
General principles
1.   The Community is founded on the values of democracy, the rule of law, respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms and seeks to develop and consolidate commitment to these values in partner countries and regions through dialogue and cooperation.
2.   In the implementation of this Regulation, a differentiated approach depending on development contexts and needs shall be pursued so that partner countries or regions are provided with specific, tailor-made cooperation, based on their own needs, strategies, priorities and assets.
Least developed countries and low income countries shall be given priority in terms of overall resource allocation in order to achieve the MDGs. Appropriate attention shall be given to support the pro-poor development of middle income countries, particularly the lower middle income countries many of which face problems similar to those of low income countries.
3.   Mainstreaming of the following cross-cutting issues shall be undertaken in all programmes: the promotion of human rights, gender equality, democracy, good governance, the rights of the child and indigenous peoples' rights, environmental sustainability and combating HIV/AIDS. In addition, particular attention shall be given to strengthening the rule of law, improving access to justice and supporting civil society, as well as promoting dialogue, participation and reconciliation, and institution-building.
4.   The Community shall take account of the objectives laid down in Title XX of the Treaty and in Article 2 of this Regulation, in all policies which are likely to affect partner countries and regions. For measures financed under this Regulation, the Community shall also aim to ensure coherence with other areas of its external action. This shall be ensured in formulating policy, strategic planning and the programming and implementation of measures.
5.   The Community and the Member States shall improve coordination and complementarity of their policies on development cooperation by responding to partner countries' and regions' priorities at country and regional level. Community policy in the sphere of development cooperation shall be complementary to the policies pursued by the Member States.
6.   The Commission and the Member States shall seek regular and frequent exchanges of information, including with other donors, and promote better donor coordination and complementarity by working towards joint multiannual programming, based on partner countries' poverty reduction or equivalent strategies and partner countries' own budget processes, by common implementation mechanisms including shared analysis, by joint donor-wide missions and by the use of co-financing arrangements.
7.   Within their respective spheres of competence, the Community and the Member States shall promote a multilateral approach to global challenges and foster cooperation with multilateral and regional organisations and bodies such as international financial institutions, UN agencies, funds and programmes, and other bilateral donors.
8.   The Community shall promote effective cooperation with partner countries and regions in line with international best practice. It shall promote:
(a)
a development process that is partner country led and owned. The Community shall increasingly align its support with partners' national development strategies, reform policies and procedures. The Community shall contribute to strengthening the process of mutual accountability between partner governments and donors and promote local expertise and local employment;
(b)
inclusive and participatory approaches to development and a broad involvement of all segments of society in the development process and in national dialogue, including political dialogue;
(c)
effective cooperation modalities and instruments as set out in Article 25 in line with OECD/DAC best practices, adapted to the particular circumstances of each partner country or region, with a focus on programme-based approaches, delivery of predictable aid funding, the development and use of country systems and on results-based approaches to development including, where appropriate, MDG targets and indicators;
(d)
improved impact of policies and programming through coordination and harmonisation between donors to reduce overlap and duplication, to improve complementarity and to support donor-wide initiatives. Coordination shall take place in partner countries and regions using agreed guidelines and best practice principles on coordination and aid effectiveness;
(e)
an MDG profile in Country Strategy Papers and in its multiannual programming.
9.   The Commission shall inform and have regular exchanges of views with the European Parliament.
10.   The Commission shall seek regular exchanges of information with civil society.
