Article 23
Adoption of special measures not provided for in the strategy papers or multiannual indicative programmes
1.   In the event of unforeseen and duly justified needs or circumstances related to natural disasters, civil strife or crises, and which cannot be funded under Regulation (EC) No 1717/2006 or Regulation (EC) No 1257/96, the Commission shall adopt special measures not provided for in the strategy papers or multiannual indicative programmes (hereinafter referred to as ‘special measures’).
Special measures may also be used to fund measures to ease the transition from emergency aid to long-term development operations, including those to better prepare people to deal with recurring crises.
2.   Special measures shall specify the objectives pursued, the intervention areas, the expected results, the management procedures and the total amount of financing. They shall contain a description of the operations to be financed, an indication of the amounts allocated for each operation and the indicative timetable for their implementation. They shall include a definition of the type of performance indicators that will have to be monitored when implementing the special measures.
3.   Where the cost of such measures exceeds EUR 10 million, the Commission shall adopt them under the management procedure referred to in Article 35(2). For special measures below EUR 10 million, the Commission shall send the measures to the Member States and the European Parliament for information within one month of adopting its decision.
4.   The procedure referred to in Article 35(2) need not be used for amendments to special measures, such as those making technical adjustments, extending the implementation period, reassigning funds within the forecast budget, or increasing or reducing the size of the budget by less than 20 % of the initial budget, provided these amendments do not affect the initial objectives set out in the Commission decision. Any such technical adjustments shall be communicated within one month to the European Parliament and to the Member States.
