Article 49
Temporary measures concerning plants, plant products and other objects likely to pose newly identified pest risks or other suspected phytosanitary risks
1.   The Commission may adopt, by means of implementing acts, temporary measures as regards the introduction into, and movement within, the Union territory of plants, plant products and other objects from third countries where the following conditions are fulfilled:
(a)
the plants, plant products or other objects are likely to pose newly identified pest risks which are not sufficiently covered by any Union measures and are not linked, or cannot yet be linked, to Union quarantine pests or pests subject to measures adopted pursuant to Article 30(1);
(b)
there is insufficient phytosanitary experience, such as in relation to new plant species or pathways, as regards trade in the plants, plant products and other objects concerned originating in or dispatched from the third countries concerned;
(c)
no assessment has been carried out as regards the newly identified pest risks for the Union territory in respect of those plants, plant products or other objects from the third countries concerned.
Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 107(2).
2.   The temporary measures referred to in paragraph 1 shall be adopted taking into account Section 2 of Annex II and Annex IV.
They shall provide for one or more of the following, as necessary in the case concerned:
(a)
systematic and intensive inspections and sampling, at the point of introduction, of each lot of plants, plant products or other objects introduced into the Union territory and the testing of samples;
(b)
a quarantine period, within a quarantine station or a confinement facility as referred to in Article 60, to verify the absence of the newly identified pest risk concerned in those plants, plant products or other objects;
(c)
a prohibition of the introduction of those plants, plant products or other objects into the Union territory.
In the cases referred to in points (a) and (b) of the second subparagraph, the implementing act referred to in paragraph 1 may also set out specific measures to be taken before the introduction into the Union territory of those plants, plant products or other objects.
3.   The temporary measures referred to in paragraph 1 shall apply for an appropriate and reasonable period of time, pending the characterisation of pests likely to be associated with those plants, plant products or other objects from those third countries and the full assessment of the risks posed by those pests in accordance with Section 1 of Annex I.
4.   On duly justified imperative grounds of urgency to address a serious newly identified pest risk, the Commission shall adopt immediately applicable implementing acts, in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 107(3). Those acts shall be adopted in accordance with the principles set out in Section 2 of Annex II.
5.   By way of derogation from the measures adopted pursuant to paragraph 1 of this Article, Article 48 shall apply to the introduction into, and the movement within, the Union territory of plants, plant products or other objects used for official testing, scientific or educational purposes, trials, varietal selection or breeding.
6.   Member States shall submit a report to the Commission and the other Member States, by 30 April of each year, on the application of the measures referred to in point (a) or (b) of the second subparagraph of paragraph 2 during the preceding calendar year.
Member States shall notify the Commission and the other Member States where, following the application of the measures referred to in points (a) or (b) of the second subparagraph of paragraph 2, a pest has been found to be present which is likely to pose newly identified pest risks.
Member States shall notify, through the electronic notification system referred to in Article 103, the Commission and the other Member States of any case where the introduction of a plant, plant product or other object into the Union territory was refused, or its movement within the Union territory prohibited, because the Member State concerned considered that the prohibition referred to in point (c) of the second subparagraph of paragraph 2 was violated. Where applicable, that notification shall include the measures taken by that Member State on the plants, plant products or other objects concerned, as referred to in Union legislation on official controls.
Where applicable, the third country from which the plants, plant products or other objects were dispatched for introduction into the Union territory shall also be notified.
