Article 18
Establishment of demarcated areas
1.   Where one of the situations referred to in points (a) and (b) of the first paragraph of Article 11 is officially confirmed, the competent authority shall immediately establish one or more areas where the eradication measures referred to in Article 17(1) are to be taken (‘demarcated area’).
The demarcated area shall consist of an infested zone and a buffer zone.
2.   The infested zone shall, as applicable, contain:
(a)
all plants known to be infested by the pest concerned;
(b)
all plants showing signs or symptoms indicating possible infestation by that pest;
(c)
all other plants liable to have been or become contaminated or infested by that pest, including plants liable to be infested due to their susceptibility to that pest and their close proximity to infested plants or common source of production, if known, with infested plants, or plants grown from them;
(d)
land, soil, water courses or other elements infested, or liable to be infested, by the pest concerned.
3.   The buffer zone shall be adjacent to the infested zone and shall surround it.
Its extent shall be appropriate in view of the risk of the pest concerned spreading out of the infested zone naturally or by human activities in the infested zone and its surroundings, and shall be decided in accordance with the principles set out in Section 2 of Annex II.
However, where any risk of the pest spreading out of the infested zone is eliminated or reduced to an acceptable level through natural or artificial barriers, no buffer zone shall be required to be established.
4.   By way of derogation from paragraph 1, where upon initial examination the competent authority concludes, in view of the nature of the pest, the plant, plant product or other object concerned and the site where it was found, that the pest concerned can be eliminated immediately, the competent authority may decide not to establish a demarcated area.
In that case, it shall carry out a survey to determine whether any further plants or plant products have been infested. On the basis of that survey, the competent authority shall determine whether there is a need to establish a demarcated area.
5.   Where, in accordance with paragraphs 2 and 3, a demarcated area is to extend into the territory of another Member State, the Member State where the pest concerned was found to be present shall immediately contact the Member State into whose territory the demarcated area is to extend in order to allow that Member State to take all appropriate actions, as referred to in paragraphs 1 to 4.
6.   Member States shall notify the Commission and the other Member States, by 30 April of each year, of the number and locations of the demarcated areas established, the pests concerned, and the respective measures taken during the preceding calendar year.
This paragraph shall apply without prejudice to any obligation to notify demarcated areas laid down in the implementing acts referred to in Article 104.
