Article 83
Content and format of the plant passport
1.   The plant passport shall take the form of a distinct label, made on any substrate suitable for printing the elements referred to in paragraph 2, provided that the plant passport is clearly distinguishable from any other information or label which may also be indicated on that substrate.
The plant passport shall be easily visible and clearly legible, and the information on it shall be unchangeable and durable.
2.   The plant passport for movement within the Union territory shall contain the elements set out in Part A of Annex VII.
By way of derogation from point 1(e) of Part A of Annex VII, the traceability code shall not be required where plants for planting fulfil all of the following conditions:
(a)
they are prepared in such a way that they are ready for the sale to final users without any further preparation and no risk exists concerning the spread of Union quarantine pests or pests subject to measures adopted pursuant to Article 30(1);
(b)
they do not belong to types or species listed in an implementing act provided for in paragraph 3 of this Article.
3.   The Commission shall, by means of implementing acts, identify types and species of plants for planting for which the exemption referred to in paragraph 2 shall not apply. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 107(2).
4.   The plant passport for introduction into, and movement within, a protected zone shall contain the elements set out in Part B of Annex VII.
5.   In the case of plants for planting produced, or made available on the market, as pre-basic, basic or certified material or pre-basic, basic or certified seed or seed potatoes, as respectively referred to in Directives 66/401/EEC, 66/402/EEC, 68/193/EEC, 2002/54/EC, 2002/55/EC, 2002/56/EC, 2002/57/EC and 2008/90/EC, the plant passport shall be included, in a distinct form, in the official label produced in accordance with the respective provisions of those Directives.
Where this paragraph applies, the plant passport for movement within the Union territory shall contain the elements set out in Part C of Annex VII to this Regulation.
Where this paragraph applies, the plant passport for introduction into, and movement within, a protected zone shall contain the elements set out in Part D of Annex VII to this Regulation.
6.   The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 105 amending Parts A, B, C and D of Annex VII in order to adapt the elements set out therein, where applicable, to the development of scientific and technical knowledge.
7.   By 14 December 2017, the Commission shall adopt, by means of implementing acts, the format specifications of the plant passport for movement within the Union territory and the plant passport for introduction into, and movement within, a protected zone, as regards the plant passports referred to in the first and second subparagraphs of paragraph 2 and in the second and third subparagraphs of paragraph 5. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 107(2).
Where the nature of particular plants, plant products or other objects so requires, specific size specifications for the plant passport may be set out for such plants, plant products or other objects.
8.   A plant passport may also be issued in an electronic form (‘electronic plant passport’), provided that it contains all the elements referred to in paragraph 2, and that the technical arrangements have been set out through the implementing acts referred to in the second subparagraph of this paragraph.
The Commission may, by means of implementing acts, set out technical arrangements for the issuance of electronic plant passports, to ensure their compliance with the provisions of this Article and an appropriate, credible and effective mode for the issuance of those plant passports. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 107(2).
