Article 102
Pre-export certificates
1.   The competent authorities of the Member State from which the plants, plant products or other objects referred to in Article 100(1) are exported and the competent authorities of the Member State in which the plants, plant products or other objects were grown, produced, stored or processed shall exchange the necessary phytosanitary information as the basis for issuing the phytosanitary certificate for export.
2.   The exchange of information referred to in paragraph 1 shall take the form of a harmonised document (‘pre-export certificate’), in which the competent authorities of the Member State, in which the plants, plant products and other objects were grown, produced, stored or processed, certify compliance of those plants, plant products or other objects with specific phytosanitary requirements concerning one or more of the following:
(a)
the absence, or presence below a specified threshold, of particular pests in the plants, plants products or other objects concerned;
(b)
the origin of the plants, plant products or other objects concerned in a specific field, production site, place of production or area;
(c)
the pest status in the field, production site, place of production or area of origin or country of origin of the plants, plant products or other objects concerned;
(d)
the results of the inspections, sampling and testing of the plants, plant products or other objects concerned;
(e)
the phytosanitary procedures applied to the production or processing of the plants, plant products or other objects concerned.
3.   The pre-export certificate shall be issued, on request of the professional operator, by the competent authorities of the Member State in which the plants, plant products or other objects were grown, produced, stored or processed, while those plants, plant products or other objects are on the premises of the professional operator concerned.
4.   The pre-export certificate shall accompany the plants, plant products and other objects concerned during their movement within the Union territory, unless the information contained in it is exchanged between the Member States concerned through, or in electronic exchange with, a computerised information management system for official controls at Union level.
5.   Without prejudice to the requirements set out in paragraph 3, the pre-export certificate may be issued when the plants, plant products or other objects have left the premises of the professional operator concerned, provided that inspections and, where necessary, sampling have been carried out, confirming the compliance of those plants, plant products or other objects with one or more of the specific phytosanitary requirements referred to in paragraph 2.
6.   The pre-export certificate shall contain the elements and shall be in the format as set out in Part C of Annex VIII.
The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 105 amending Part C of Annex VIII in order to adapt it to the development of scientific and technical knowledge and of relevant international standards.
7.   The Commission may, by means of implementing acts, lay down the procedures for the issuance of the pre-export certificate. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 107(2).
