Article 79
Plants, plant products and other objects for which a plant passport is required for movement within the Union territory
1.   Plant passports are required for movement of certain plants, plant products and other objects within the Union territory. The Commission shall, by means of implementing acts, establish a list of those plants, plant products and other objects, for which a plant passport is required for their movement within the Union territory.
That list shall include:
(a)
all plants for planting, other than seeds;
(b)
in the first of those implementing acts, the plants, plant products and other objects listed in point (I) of Part (A) of Annex V to Directive 2000/29/EC, provided that they are not already covered by point (a) of this subparagraph;
(c)
plants, plant products and other objects for which requirements have been adopted pursuant to Article 28(1), (2) or (3) or Article 30(1), (3) or (4) concerning their movement within the Union territory;
(d)
seeds listed in the implementing act provided for in Article 37(2); and
(e)
plants, plant products and other objects listed in the implementing acts provided for in Article 41(2) and (3) with regard to their movement within the Union, with the exception of plants for planting, plant products and other objects requiring another specific label or other type of attestation pursuant to that Article.
2.   The Commission shall, by means of implementing acts, amend the implementing act referred to in paragraph 1 in the following cases:
(a)
where a plant, plant product or other object not listed in that act fulfils point (c), (d) or (e) of the second subparagraph of paragraph 1; or
(b)
where a plant, plant product or other object listed in that act does not fulfil point (c), (d) or (e) of the second subparagraph of paragraph 1.
3.   In addition to the cases referred to in paragraph 2, the Commission may, by means of implementing acts, amend the implementing act referred to in paragraph 1, in accordance with the principles set out in Section 2 of Annex II, where there is a risk that a plant, plant product or other object not listed in that act hosts a Union quarantine pest or where, for a plant, plant product or other object listed in that act, that risk no longer exists.
4.   The implementing acts referred to in paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 107(2).
5.   By way of derogation from paragraphs 1, 2 and 3, no plant passport shall be required for the plants, plant products or other objects which are subject to Articles 46, 47, 48 and 75.
6.   The Commission shall, not later than 14 December 2021, submit a report to the European Parliament and the Council to present the experience gained from the extension of the plant passport system to all movement of plants for planting within the Union territory including a clear cost-benefit analysis for the operators, accompanied, if appropriate, by a legislative proposal.
