Article 28
Union measures for specific Union quarantine pests
1.   The Commission may, by means of implementing acts, set out measures against specific Union quarantine pests. Those measures shall implement, specifically for each of the pests concerned, one or more of the following provisions:
(a)
Article 10 concerning measures to be taken in the event of suspicion and official confirmation by competent authorities of the presence of that Union quarantine pest;
(b)
Article 14 concerning measures to be taken immediately by professional operators;
(c)
Article 15 concerning measures to be taken by persons other than professional operators;
(d)
Article 17 concerning eradication of Union quarantine pests;
(e)
Article 18 concerning establishment of demarcated areas;
(f)
Article 19 concerning surveys and modifications of demarcated areas and lifting of restrictions;
(g)
Article 22 concerning surveys on Union quarantine pests and pests provisionally qualifying as Union quarantine pests;
(h)
Article 24 concerning surveys for priority pests, as regards the number of visual examinations, samples and tests for particular priority pests;
(i)
Article 25 concerning contingency plans for priority pests;
(j)
Article 26 concerning simulation exercises for priority pests;
(k)
Article 27 concerning action plans for priority pests.
Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 107(2).
2.   By way of derogation from Article 17, where it is concluded, on the basis of the surveys referred to in Article 19 or other evidence, that the eradication of the Union quarantine pest concerned in a demarcated area is not possible, the Commission shall adopt implementing acts referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article which set out measures with the purpose of containment.
For the purpose of reaching that conclusion, the Commission shall, without delay, take the necessary actions following the submission of the relevant evidence by the Member State concerned or any other source.
3.   Where the Commission concludes that prevention measures in areas outside demarcated areas are necessary to protect the part of the Union territory where the Union quarantine pest concerned is not present, it may adopt implementing acts referred to in paragraph 1 setting out such measures.
4.   The measures referred to in paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 shall be taken in accordance with Annex II, taking into account the specific risks of the Union quarantine pests concerned, the specific ecoclimatic conditions and risks as regards the Member States concerned and the need to implement the necessary risk-mitigation measures in a harmonised manner at Union level.
5.   Until a measure has been adopted by the Commission, the Member State may maintain any measures that it has taken.
6.   On duly justified imperative grounds of urgency to address a serious pest risk, the Commission shall adopt immediately applicable implementing acts, in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 107(3). Those acts shall be adopted in accordance with Annex II, taking into account the specific risks of the Union quarantine pests concerned, the specific ecoclimatic conditions and risks as regards the Member States concerned and the need to implement the necessary risk-mitigation measures in a harmonised manner at Union level.
7.   Member States shall notify, through the electronic notification system referred to in Article 103, the Commission and other Member States of any cases of non-compliance with the measures adopted pursuant to this Article which create a risk of spread of Union quarantine pests.
