Article 41
Plants, plant products and other objects subject to special and equivalent requirements
1.   Certain plants, plant products or other objects may only be introduced into, or moved within, the Union territory if special requirements, or equivalent requirements, are fulfilled. Those plants, plant products or other objects may originate from third countries or within the Union territory.
2.   The Commission shall, by means of implementing acts, adopt a list containing the plants, plant products and other objects and the corresponding special requirements as referred to in paragraph 1. That list shall, where applicable, include the third countries, groups of third countries or specific areas within third countries concerned.
The first of those implementing acts shall include the plants, plant products and other objects, the special requirements and, where applicable, their third country of origin as listed in Part A of Annex IV to Directive 2000/29/EC.
Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 107(2) of this Regulation.
In the list established by those implementing acts, those plants, plant products and other objects shall also be identified by their respective CN code where that code is available. Other codes laid down by Union legislation shall, in addition, be referred to where they specify further the applicable CN code for a specific plant, plant product or other object.
3.   Where a plant, plant product or other object poses a pest risk of an unacceptable level due to the likelihood that it hosts a Union quarantine pest, and that pest risk can be reduced to an acceptable level by applying one or more of the measures set out in points 2 and 3 of Section 1 of Annex II, the Commission shall amend the implementing act referred to in paragraph 2 to include in it that plant, plant product or other object and the measures to be applied to it. Those measures and the requirements referred to in paragraph 2 constitute ‘special requirements’.
The measures referred to in the first subparagraph may take the form of specific requirements, adopted in accordance with Article 44(1), for the introduction into the Union territory of particular plants, plant products or other objects which are equivalent to special requirements for the introduction into, and movement within, the Union territory of those plants, plant products or other objects (‘equivalent requirements’).
Where a plant, plant product or other object included in that implementing act does not pose a pest risk of an unacceptable level, or it poses such a risk but that risk cannot be reduced to an acceptable level by the special requirements, the Commission shall amend that implementing act accordingly by removing that plant, plant product or other object from the list or by including it in the list referred to in Article 40(2).
The acceptability of the level of that pest risk shall be assessed, and the measures to reduce that risk to an acceptable level shall be adopted, in accordance with the principles set out in Section 2 of Annex II, where appropriate with regard to one or more specific third countries or parts thereof.
Those amendments shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 107(2).
On duly justified imperative grounds of urgency to address a serious pest risk, the Commission shall adopt immediately applicable implementing acts in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 107(3).
4.   In the event that plants, plant products or other objects have been introduced into, or moved within, the Union territory in violation of paragraph 1, Member States shall adopt the necessary measures, as referred to in Union legislation on official controls, and shall notify the Commission and other Member States through the electronic notification system referred to in Article 103.
Where applicable, that notification shall also be made to the third country from which the plants, plant products or other objects were introduced into the Union territory.
