Article 100
Phytosanitary certificate for export from the Union
1.   Where, for the export of a plant, plant product or other object from the Union territory to a third country, a phytosanitary certificate is required by the phytosanitary import requirements of that third country (‘phytosanitary certificate for export’), that certificate shall be issued by the competent authority, at the request of the professional operator, when all of the following conditions are fulfilled:
(a)
the professional operator is registered by that competent authority in accordance with Article 65;
(b)
the professional operator has under its control the plant, plant product or other object to be exported;
(c)
it is ensured that that plant, plant product or other object complies with the phytosanitary import requirements of the third country concerned.
The competent authority shall also issue a phytosanitary certificate for export at the request of persons other than professional operators, provided that the conditions set out in points (b) and (c) of the first subparagraph are fulfilled.
For the purpose of this paragraph, the competent authority shall not delegate the issuance of the phytosanitary certificate for export to any other person.
2.   Without prejudice to obligations under the IPPC, and taking into account the relevant international standards, the phytosanitary certificate for export shall be issued where the information available allows the competent authority to certify compliance of the plant, plant product or other object concerned with the phytosanitary import requirements of the third country concerned. That information may originate from one or more of the following elements, as applicable:
(a)
inspections, sampling and testing of the plants, plant products or other objects concerned, or their place of production and its vicinities;
(b)
official information on the pest status in the production site, place of production, area or country of origin of the plants, plant products or other objects concerned;
(c)
a plant passport, as referred to in Article 78, accompanying the plants, plant products or other objects concerned, where that plant passport attests the results of inspections by the competent authority;
(d)
the mark of wood packaging material as referred to in Article 96(1), or the attestations referred to in Article 99(1);
(e)
the information included in the pre-export certificate referred to in Article 102;
(f)
official information included in the phytosanitary certificate as referred to in Article 71, where the plants, plant products or other objects concerned have been introduced into the Union territory from a third country.
3.   The phytosanitary certificate for export shall comply with the description and format of the model set out in Part A of Annex VIII.
4.   The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 105 amending the elements referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article and Part A of Annex VIII to adapt them to the development of the relevant international standards.
5.   Electronic phytosanitary certificates for export shall be provided through, or in electronic exchange with, a computerised information management system for official controls at Union level.
