Article 54
Plants, plant products and other objects subject to special requirements for protected zones
1.   Certain plants, plant products or other objects may only be introduced into, or moved within, certain protected zones if special requirements for those protected zones are fulfilled.
2.   The Commission shall, by means of implementing acts, adopt a list containing the plants, plant products and other objects, their respective protected zones and the corresponding special requirements for protected zones. The first of those implementing acts shall include the plants, plant products and other objects, their respective protected zones and the special requirements for protected zones as listed in Part B of Annex IV to Directive 2000/29/EC.
Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 107(2) of this Regulation.
In the list established by those implementing acts, those plants, plant products and other objects shall also be identified by their respective CN code where that code is available. Other codes laid down by Union legislation shall, in addition, be referred to where they specify further the applicable CN code for a specific plant, plant product or other object.
3.   Where a plant, plant product or other object coming from outside the protected zone concerned poses a pest risk of an unacceptable level for that protected zone by its likelihood of hosting a protected zone quarantine pest, and that risk can be reduced to an acceptable level by applying one or more of the measures set out in points 2 and 3 of Section 1 of Annex II, the Commission shall amend the implementing act referred to in paragraph 2 to include in it that plant, plant product or other object and the measures to be applied to it. Those measures and the requirements referred to in paragraph 2 constitute ‘special requirements for protected zones’.
Where a plant, plant product or other object included in that implementing act does not pose a pest risk of an unacceptable level for the protected zone concerned, or it poses such a risk but that risk cannot be reduced to an acceptable level by the special requirements for protected zones, the Commission shall amend that implementing act accordingly.
Those amendments shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 107(2).
The acceptability of the level of that pest risk shall be assessed, and the measures to reduce that risk to an acceptable level shall be adopted, in accordance with the principles set out in Section 2 of Annex II.
On duly justified imperative grounds of urgency to address a serious pest risk, the Commission shall adopt immediately applicable implementing acts in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 107(3).
4.   Member States shall notify, through the electronic notification system referred to in Article 103, the Commission and other Member States where plants, plant products or other objects have been introduced into, or moved within, the protected zone concerned in violation of the measures adopted pursuant to this Article.
Where applicable, the Member States or the Commission shall notify the third country from which the plants, plant products or other objects were introduced into the Union territory.
