Article 22
Surveys on Union quarantine pests and pests provisionally qualifying as Union quarantine pests
1.   Member States shall carry out risk-based surveys, over specific periods of time, checking at least for:
(a)
the presence of any Union quarantine pest; and
(b)
signs or symptoms of any pest subject to the measures referred to in Article 29 or to measures adopted pursuant to Article 30(1).
Those surveys shall take place in all areas where the pest concerned was not known to be present.
Those surveys shall not be required to be carried out for pests for which it is unequivocally concluded that they cannot become established or spread in the Member State concerned due to its ecoclimatic conditions or to the absence of the host species.
2.   The design of the surveys referred to in paragraph 1 shall be based on the risk that the pest occurs in the area covered by each survey. They shall consist, at least, of visual examinations by the competent authority and, where appropriate, the collection of samples and performance of tests. Those surveys shall be carried out in all appropriate locations and shall include, where appropriate, premises, vehicles, machinery and packaging used by professional operators and other persons. They shall be based on sound scientific and technical principles and shall be carried out at appropriate times with regard to the possibility to detect the pest concerned.
Those surveys shall take account of scientific and technical evidence, and any other appropriate information, concerning the presence of the pests concerned.
3.   Member States shall report to the Commission and the other Member States, by 30 April of each year, the results of the surveys referred to in paragraph 1 which were carried out in the preceding calendar year. Those reports shall include information on where the surveys were conducted, the timing of the surveys, the pests and the plants, plant products or other objects concerned, the number of inspections and samples taken, and the finding of each pest concerned.
The Commission may, by means of implementing acts, set out the format of those reports, as well as instructions on how to fill it in. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 107(2).
