Article 29
Measures by Member States concerning pests not listed as Union quarantine pests
1.   Where the presence of a pest that is not included in the list of Union quarantine pests is officially confirmed in the territory of a Member State, and the Member State considers that that pest may fulfil the conditions for inclusion in the list of Union quarantine pests, it shall immediately assess whether the pest fulfils the criteria set out in Subsection 1 of Section 3 of Annex I. If it concludes that those criteria are fulfilled, it shall immediately take eradication measures in accordance with Annex II. Articles 17 to 20 shall apply.
Where it is concluded, on the basis of the surveys referred to in Article 19 or other evidence, that the eradication of a pest in a demarcated area is not possible, Article 28(2) shall apply mutatis mutandis.
Where the presence of a pest fulfilling the criteria referred to in the first subparagraph is officially confirmed in a consignment of plants, plant products or other objects introduced into, or moved within, the territory of a Member State, that Member State shall take the necessary measures to prevent the entry of that pest into, and its establishment and spread in, the Union territory.
Where a Member State suspects the presence in its territory of a pest fulfilling the criteria referred to in the first subparagraph, Article 10 shall apply mutatis mutandis.
Pending the official confirmation of the presence of that pest, the Member State shall, where appropriate, take phytosanitary measures to mitigate the risk of it spreading.
2.   After taking the measures referred to in paragraph 1, the Member State shall assess whether the pest concerned fulfils the criteria for quarantine pests set out in Section 1 of Annex I.
3.   The Member State concerned shall notify the Commission and the other Member States of the presence of the pest referred to in paragraph 1. It shall also inform the Commission and the other Member States of the assessment referred to in that paragraph, the measures taken and the evidence justifying those measures.
It shall notify the Commission of the results of the assessment referred to in paragraph 2 within two years of the official confirmation of the presence of that pest.
Notifications of the presence of that pest shall be submitted through the electronic notification system referred to in Article 103.
