Article 91
Pest risk management plans
1.   Authorised operators may have in place pest risk management plans. The competent authority shall approve those plans, if they fulfil all of the following conditions:
(a)
they set out measures which are appropriate for those operators to fulfil the obligations set out in Article 90(1);
(b)
they fulfil the requirements set out in paragraph 2 of this Article.
Authorised operators implementing an approved pest risk management plan may be subject to inspections with a reduced frequency.
2.   The pest risk management plans shall cover, where appropriate in the form of standard operating procedure manuals, at least the following:
(a)
the information required under Article 66(2) concerning the registration of the authorised operator;
(b)
the information required under Articles 69(4) and 70(1) concerning the traceability of plants, plant products and other objects;
(c)
a description of the production processes of the authorised operator and its activities as regards movement and sales of plants, plant products and other objects;
(d)
an analysis of the critical points referred to in Article 90(1) and the measures taken by the authorised operator to mitigate the pest risks associated with those critical points;
(e)
the procedures in place and actions foreseen where quarantine pests are suspected or found to be present, the recording of those suspicions or findings and the recording of the actions taken;
(f)
the roles and responsibilities of the personnel involved in the notifications referred to in Article 14, the examinations referred to in Article 87(1), the issuance of plant passports pursuant to Article 84(1), Article 93(1) and (2) and Article 94, and the attaching of plant passports pursuant to Article 88; and
(g)
the training provided to the personnel referred to in point (f) of this paragraph.
3.   Where the competent authority becomes aware that the professional operator concerned does not apply the measures referred to in point (a) of the first subparagraph of paragraph 1, or that a pest risk management plan is no longer up to date with any of the requirements referred to in point (b) of the first subparagraph of paragraph 1, that authority shall without delay take the measures necessary to ensure that non-compliance with those conditions does not continue. Those measures may include the withdrawal of the approval of that plan.
Where the competent authority has taken measures in accordance with the first subparagraph other than the withdrawal of the approval of the plan, and the non-compliance continues, that authority shall without delay withdraw that approval.
