Article 101
Phytosanitary certificate for re-export from the Union
1.   For the re-export of a plant, plant product or other object which originates in a third country and has been introduced into the Union territory from that, or another, third country, a phytosanitary certificate for re-export from the Union (‘the phytosanitary certificate for re-export’) shall, where possible, be issued instead of the phytosanitary certificate for export.
The phytosanitary certificate for re-export shall be issued by the competent authority at the request of the professional operator when all of the following conditions are fulfilled:
(a)
that professional operator is registered by that competent authority in accordance with Article 65;
(b)
the professional operator has under its control the plant, plant product or other object to be re-exported;
(c)
it is ensured that that plant, plant product or other object complies with the phytosanitary import requirements of the third country concerned.
The competent authority shall also issue a phytosanitary certificate for re-export at the request of persons other than professional operators, provided that the conditions set out in points (b) and (c) of the second subparagraph are fulfilled.
For the purpose of this paragraph, the competent authority shall not delegate the issuance of the phytosanitary certificate for re-export to any other person.
2.   Without prejudice to obligations under the IPPC, and taking into account the relevant international standards, the phytosanitary certificate for re-export shall be issued where the information available allows certifying of compliance with the phytosanitary import requirements of the third country concerned and that all of the following conditions are complied with:
(a)
the original phytosanitary certificate accompanying the plant, plant product or other object concerned from the third country of origin, or a certified copy of it, is attached to the phytosanitary certificate for re-export;
(b)
the plant, plant product or other object concerned has not been grown, produced or processed to change its nature since its introduction in the Union territory;
(c)
the plant, plant product or other object concerned has not been exposed to any risk of infestation or contamination with quarantine pests or regulated non-quarantine pests, listed as such by the third country of destination, during storage in the Member State from which it is to be exported to that third country;
(d)
the identity of the plant, plant product or other object concerned has been maintained.
3.   Article 100(2) shall apply mutatis mutandis.
4.   The phytosanitary certificate for re-export shall comply with the description and format of the model set out in Part B of Annex VIII.
5.   The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 105 amending Part B of Annex VIII to adapt it to the development of the relevant international standards.
6.   Electronic phytosanitary certificates for re-export shall be provided through, or in electronic exchange with, a computerised information management system for official controls at Union level.
