Article 66
Procedure of registration
1.   Professional operators falling within the scope of Article 65(1) shall submit to the competent authorities an application for registration.
2.   The application for registration shall include the following elements:
(a)
name, address in the Member State of registration and contact details of the professional operator;
(b)
a statement concerning the intention of the professional operator to exercise one or more of the activities referred to in Article 65(1) concerning plants, plant products and other objects;
(c)
a statement concerning the intention of the professional operator to carry out, as applicable, one or more of the following activities:
(i)
issuing of plant passports for plants, plant products and other objects pursuant to Article 84(1);
(ii)
placing of the mark on wood packaging material referred to in Article 96(1);
(iii)
issuing of any other attestation referred to in Article 99(1);
(d)
address of the premises and, where applicable, the location of land plots used by the professional operator in the Member State concerned to carry out the activities referred to in Article 65(1) for the purpose of the registration; and
(e)
the commodity types, families, genera or species of the plants and plant products and, where appropriate, the nature of other objects concerned by the activities of the professional operator, as referred to in Article 65(1).
3.   The competent authorities shall register a professional operator without delay where the application for registration contains the elements set out in paragraph 2.
4.   By way of derogation from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article, a competent authority shall register a professional operator without the submission of an application for registration if that operator is registered in accordance with the third subparagraph of Article 6(5), Article 6(6) or point (b) of Article 13c(1) of Directive 2000/29/EC or national plant health rules and if all elements set out in paragraph 2 of this Article are available to that competent authority. Where relevant, the professional operator concerned shall submit an update of those elements by 14 March 2020.
5.   Registered operators shall, where relevant, submit annually an update concerning any changes in the data referred to in points (d) and (e) of paragraph 2 and the statements referred to in points (b) and (c) of paragraph 2. That submission shall take place by 30 April of each year with regard to the updating of the data of the preceding year.
An application for updating the data referred to in point (a) of paragraph 2 shall be submitted no later than 30 days after the change in those data.
6.   Where the competent authority becomes aware that the registered operator no longer carries out the activities referred to in Article 65(1), or that the elements included in the application submitted by the registered operator in accordance with paragraph 2 of this Article are no longer correct, it shall request that operator to correct those elements immediately or within a specified period of time.
Where the registered operator does not correct those elements within the period of time set by the competent authority, the competent authority shall, as appropriate, amend or revoke the registration of that operator.
