Article 80
Plants, plant products and other objects for which a plant passport is required for introduction into, and movement within, protected zones
1.   Plant passports are required for certain plants, plant products and other objects being introduced into, or moved within, certain protected zones.
The Commission shall, by means of implementing acts, establish a list of those plants, plant products and other objects for which a plant passport is required for their introduction into, and movement within, certain protected zones.
That list shall include:
(a)
in the first of those implementing acts, the plants, plant products and other objects listed in point (II) of Part A of Annex V to Directive 2000/29/EC;
(b)
other plants, plant products and other objects listed in the implementing acts provided for in Article 54(3) of this Regulation.
2.   The Commission may, by means of implementing acts, amend the implementing act referred to in paragraph 1 in the following cases:
(a)
where a plant, plant product or other object not listed in that act fulfils point (b) of the third subparagraph of paragraph 1; or
(b)
where a plant, plant product or other object listed in that act does not fulfil point (b) of the third subparagraph of paragraph 1.
3.   In addition to the cases referred to in paragraph 2, the Commission may, by means of implementing acts, amend the implementing act referred to in paragraph 1, and in accordance with the principles set out in Section 2 of Annex II, where there is a risk that a plant, plant product or other object not listed in that act hosts the respective protected zone quarantine pest, or where, for a plant, plant product or other object listed in that act, that risk no longer exists.
4.   The implementing acts referred to in paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 107(2).
5.   By way of derogation from paragraphs 1, 2 and 3, no plant passport shall be required for the plants, plant products or other objects which are subject to Articles 56, 57 and 58.
