Article 8
Union quarantine pests used for official testing, scientific or educational purposes, trials, varietal selections or breeding
1.   By way of derogation from Article 5(1), Member States may, on application, temporarily authorise the introduction into, the movement within, and the holding and multiplication in, their territory of Union quarantine pests or pests subject to the measures adopted pursuant to Article 30(1) for official testing, scientific or educational purposes, trials, varietal selections, or breeding.
An authorisation shall be granted for the activity concerned only if adequate restrictions are imposed to ensure that the introduction, movement, holding, multiplication or use of the pest concerned does not result in its establishment or spread within the Union territory, taking into account the identity, biology and means of dispersal of the pest, the activity envisaged, the interaction with the environment and other relevant factors relating to the risk posed by that pest.
2.   Authorisations granted pursuant to paragraph 1 shall include all of the following conditions:
(a)
the pest is to be kept in a location and under conditions which:
(i)
the competent authorities consider to be appropriate; and
(ii)
are referred to in the authorisation;
(b)
the activity involving the pest is to be carried out in a quarantine station or a confinement facility designated by the competent authority in accordance with Article 60 and referred to in the authorisation;
(c)
the activity involving the pest is to be carried out by personnel:
(i)
whose scientific and technical competence is considered to be appropriate by the competent authority; and
(ii)
who are referred to in the authorisation;
(d)
the pest is to be accompanied by the authorisation when introduced into, moved within, or held or multiplied in, the Union territory.
3.   Authorisations granted pursuant to paragraph 1 shall be limited as to the quantity of the pest that can be introduced, moved, held, multiplied or used and the length of time that are adequate for the activity concerned. Authorisations shall not exceed the capacity of the designated quarantine station or confinement facility.
Authorisations shall include the restrictions necessary to adequately eliminate the risk of establishment and spread of the respective Union quarantine pest or pest subject to the measures adopted pursuant to Article 30(1).
4.   The competent authority shall monitor compliance with the conditions referred to in paragraph 2 and the limitation and the restrictions referred to in paragraph 3 and take the necessary action in the event of non-compliance. Where appropriate, that action shall be the revocation of the authorisation referred to in paragraph 1.
5.   The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 105 supplementing this Regulation by laying down detailed rules concerning:
(a)
the exchange of information between Member States and the Commission concerning the introduction into, movement within, and holding, multiplication and use in, the Union territory of the pests concerned;
(b)
the procedure and conditions for granting the authorisation referred to in paragraph 1; and
(c)
the monitoring of compliance and the actions to be taken in the event of non-compliance, as referred to in paragraph 4.
