Article 30
Union measures concerning pests not listed as Union quarantine pests
1.   Where the Commission receives a notification as referred to in the first subparagraph of Article 29(3), or has other evidence concerning the presence in, or imminent danger of entry into, or spread within, the Union territory of a pest which is not included in the list of Union quarantine pests and it considers that that pest may fulfil the conditions for inclusion in that list, it shall immediately assess whether, as regards the Union territory, that pest fulfils the criteria set out in Subsection 2 of Section 3 of Annex I.
Where the Commission concludes that those criteria are fulfilled, it shall immediately, by means of implementing acts, adopt measures for a limited time as regards the risks posed by that pest. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 107(2).
Those measures shall, where appropriate, implement, specifically for each of the pests concerned, one or more of the provisions referred to in points (a) to (g) of the first subparagraph of Article 28(1).
2.   After adopting the measures referred to in paragraph 1, the Commission shall assess whether the pest concerned fulfils, as regards the Union territory, the criteria for quarantine pests set out in Section 1 of Annex I.
3.   Where it is concluded, on the basis of surveys referred to in Articles 19 and 22 or other evidence, that the eradication of the pest concerned in a demarcated area is not possible, the implementing acts referred to in the second subparagraph of paragraph 1 of this Article may set out measures with the purpose of containment.
4.   Where it is concluded that prevention measures in areas outside demarcated areas are necessary to protect the part of the Union territory where the pest concerned is not present, the implementing acts referred to in paragraph 1 may set out such measures.
5.   The measures referred to in paragraphs 1, 3 and 4 shall be adopted in accordance with Annex II, taking into account the specific risks of the pests concerned and the need to implement the necessary risk-mitigation measures in a harmonised manner at Union level.
6.   Until measures have been adopted by the Commission, the Member State concerned may maintain the measures that it has taken pursuant to Article 29.
7.   On duly justified imperative grounds of urgency to address a serious pest risk, the Commission shall adopt immediately applicable implementing acts, in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 107(3). Those acts shall be adopted in accordance with Annex II, taking into account the specific risks of the pests concerned and the need to implement the necessary risk-mitigation measures in a harmonised manner at Union level.
8.   Member States shall notify, through the electronic notification system referred to in Article 103, the Commission and other Member States of any cases of non-compliance with the measures adopted pursuant to this Article which create a risk of spread of the pests referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article.
