Article 74
Plants, plant products and other objects for which phytosanitary certificates are required for introduction into a protected zone
1.   Phytosanitary certificates are required, in addition to the cases referred to in Article 72(1), (2) and (3), for the introduction of some plants, plant products and other objects into certain protected zones from certain third countries of origin or dispatch.
The Commission shall, by means of implementing acts, establish a list of those plants, plant products and other objects, and the respective third countries of origin or dispatch referred to in the first subparagraph.
That list shall include:
(a)
in the first of those implementing acts, the plants, plant products and other objects listed in Point II of Part B of Annex V to Directive 2000/29/EC;
(b)
plants, plant products and other objects listed in the implementing acts provided for in Article 54(2) or (3) of this Regulation.
In the list established by those implementing acts, the plants, plant products and other objects shall also be identified by their respective CN code where that code is available. Other codes laid down by Union legislation shall, in addition, be referred to where they specify further the applicable CN code for a specific plant, plant product or other object.
A phytosanitary certificate shall not be required for plants, plant products and other objects on that list where an implementing act adopted pursuant to Article 54(2) or (3) requires proof of compliance in the form of an official mark, as referred to in Article 96(1), or another official attestation, as referred to in Article 99(1).
2.   The Commission shall, by means of implementing acts, amend the implementing act referred to in paragraph 1 in the following cases:
(a)
where a plant, plant product or other object listed in that act does not fulfil point (b) of the third subparagraph of paragraph 1;
(b)
where a plant, plant product or other object not listed in that act fulfils point (b) of the third subparagraph of paragraph 1.
3.   In addition to the cases referred to in paragraph 2, the Commission may, by means of implementing acts, amend the implementing act referred to in paragraph 1, in accordance with the principles set out in Section 2 of Annex II, where there is a risk that a plant, plant product or other object not listed in that act hosts the respective protected zone quarantine pest, or where, for a plant, plant product or other object listed in that act, that risk no longer exists.
4.   The implementing acts referred to in paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 107(2).
5.   By way of derogation from paragraphs 1, 2 and 3, no phytosanitary certificate shall be required for the plants, plant products or other objects which are subject to Articles 56, 57 and 58 and Article 75(1).
