Article 32
Recognition of protected zones
1.   Where a quarantine pest is present in the Union territory but not in the territory of a Member State or a part thereof, and is not a Union quarantine pest, the Commission may, upon application of that Member State pursuant to paragraph 4, recognise such territory or part thereof as a protected zone in accordance with paragraph 3 as regards that quarantine pest (‘protected zone quarantine pest’).
2.   A protected zone quarantine pest shall not be introduced into, moved within, or held, multiplied or released in, the respective protected zone.
Article 8 shall apply mutatis mutandis to the introduction into, movement within, and holding and multiplication in, protected zones of protected zone quarantine pests.
3.   The Commission shall, by means of an implementing act, establish a list of protected zones and the respective protected zone quarantine pests. That list shall include the protected zones recognised in accordance with the first subparagraph of point (h) of Article 2(1) of Directive 2000/29/EC, the respective pests listed in Part B of Annex I and Part B of Annex II to Directive 2000/29/EC, and codes specifically attributed to those pests.
The Commission may, by means of implementing acts amending the implementing act referred to in the first subparagraph, recognise additional protected zones where the conditions provided for in paragraph 1 of this Article are fulfilled.
The Commission may, by means of implementing acts, replace the implementing act referred to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph for the purpose of consolidating amendments.
The implementing acts referred to in this paragraph shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 107(2).
4.   With the application referred to in paragraph 1, the Member State concerned shall submit:
(a)
a description of the boundaries of the proposed protected zone, including maps;
(b)
the results of surveys showing that, during at least the three years preceding the application, the quarantine pest concerned was not present in the territory concerned; and
(c)
evidence that the quarantine pest concerned fulfils the conditions set out in Article 3 with respect to the proposed protected zone.
5.   The surveys referred to in point (b) of paragraph 4 shall be carried out at appropriate times and be of appropriate intensity with regard to the possibility of detecting the presence of the quarantine pest concerned. They shall be based on sound scientific and technical principles, and take into account the relevant international standards.
The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 105 supplementing this Regulation by laying down detailed rules for those surveys. Those acts shall be adopted in accordance with the development of scientific and technical knowledge and the applicable international standards.
6.   The Commission may recognise temporary protected zones. For that purpose, the conditions set out in paragraphs 1 and 4 and the first subparagraph of paragraph 5 shall apply mutatis mutandis. By way of derogation from the requirement referred to in point (b) of paragraph 4, a survey shall have been carried out over a period of at least one year preceding the application.
The recognition of a temporary protected zone shall last no longer than three years after recognition, and shall expire automatically after three years.
7.   Member States shall notify the Commission and the other Member States and inform, via publication on the official website of the competent authority, the professional operators of the boundaries of the protected zones in their territory, including by means of maps.
