Article 6
Transparency concerning planned civil works
1.   In order to negotiate agreements on coordination of civil works referred to in Article 5, Member States shall require any network operator to make available upon the specific written request of an undertaking providing or authorised to provide public communications networks the following minimum information concerning on-going or planned civil works related to its physical infrastructure for which a permit has been granted, a permit granting procedure is pending or first submission to the competent authorities for permit granting is envisaged in the following six months:
(a)
the location and the type of works;
(b)
the network elements involved;
(c)
the estimated date for starting the works and their duration; and
(d)
a contact point.
The request of an undertaking providing or authorised to provide public communications networks shall specify the area in which it envisages deploying elements of high-speed electronic communications networks. Within two weeks from the date of the receipt of the written request, network operators shall provide the requested information under proportionate, non-discriminatory and transparent terms. Member States may allow access to the minimum information to be limited only when considered necessary in view of the security of the networks and their integrity, national security, public health or safety, confidentiality or operating and business secrets.
2.   The network operator may refuse the request pursuant to paragraph 1 if:
(a)
it has made the requested information publicly available in electronic format; or
(b)
access to such information is ensured via the single information point.
3.   Member States shall ensure that the network operator makes the requested minimum information referred to in paragraph 1 available via the single information point.
4.   Member States shall ensure that, in the event of a dispute arising in connection with the rights and obligations provided for in this Article, either party is entitled to refer it to a national dispute settlement body. The national dispute settlement body shall, taking full account of the principle of proportionality, issue a binding decision to resolve the dispute within the shortest possible time frame and in any case within two months, except in exceptional circumstances, without prejudice to the possibility of any party to refer the case to a court.
5.   Member States may provide for exemptions from the obligations provided for in this Article for civil works of insignificant value or in the case of critical national infrastructure. Such exemptions shall be duly reasoned. The interested parties shall be given the opportunity to comment on the draft exemptions within a reasonable period. Any such exemption shall be notified to the Commission.
