Article 4
Transparency concerning physical infrastructure
1.   Member States shall ensure that, in order to request access to physical infrastructure in accordance with Article 3(2), every undertaking providing or authorised to provide public communications networks has the right to access, upon request, the following minimum information concerning the existing physical infrastructure of any network operator:
(a)
location, and route;
(b)
type and current use of the infrastructure; and
(c)
a contact point.
Member States shall ensure that the undertaking requesting access specifies the area in which it envisages deploying elements of high-speed electronic communications networks.
Member States may allow access to the minimum information to be limited only if necessary in view of the security of the networks and their integrity, national security, public health or safety, confidentiality or operating and business secrets.
2.   Member States may require every public sector body holding, in electronic format, by reason of its tasks elements of the minimum information referred to in paragraph 1 concerning the physical infrastructure of a network operator to make it available via the single information point by electronic means before 1 January 2017, and Member States shall require such public sector bodies to make it available, upon request, to undertakings providing or authorised to provide public communications networks, without prejudice to limitations pursuant to paragraph 1. Any update to that information and any new element of minimum information referred to in paragraph 1 received by the public sector body shall be made available to the single information point within two months from the date of its receipt. That period may be extended by a maximum of one month, where this is required to guarantee the reliability of the information provided.
3.   Minimum information made available to a single information point pursuant to paragraph 2 shall be accessible promptly, via the single information point, in electronic format and under proportionate, non-discriminatory and transparent terms. Member States shall ensure that access to the minimum information pursuant to this paragraph is made available via the single information point by 1 January 2017.
4.   Where the minimum information referred to in paragraph 1 is not available via the single information point, Member States shall require network operators to provide access to such information upon the specific written request by an undertaking providing or authorised to provide public communications networks. Such request shall specify the area envisaged for the deployment of elements of high-speed electronic communications networks. Access to information shall be granted within two months from the date of receipt of the written request under proportionate, non-discriminatory and transparent terms, without prejudice to the limitations pursuant to paragraph 1.
5.   Upon the specific written request of an undertaking providing or authorised to provide public communications networks, Member States shall require network operators to meet reasonable requests for on-site surveys of specific elements of their physical infrastructure. Such request shall specify the elements of the network concerned with a view to deploying elements of high-speed electronic communications networks. On-site surveys of the specified network elements shall be granted under proportionate, non-discriminatory and transparent terms within one month from the date of receipt of the written request, without prejudice to the limitations pursuant to paragraph 1.
6.   Member States shall ensure that, in the event of a dispute arising in connection with the rights and obligations provided for in this Article, either party is entitled to refer the dispute to a national dispute settlement body. The national dispute settlement body shall, taking full account of the principle of proportionality, issue a binding decision to resolve the dispute within the shortest possible time frame and in any case within two months, except in exceptional circumstances, without prejudice to the possibility of any party to refer the case to a court.
7.   Member States may provide for exemptions from the obligations provided for in paragraphs 1 to 5 in the case of existing physical infrastructures considered not technically suitable for the deployment of high-speed electronic communications networks or in case of critical national infrastructure. Such exemptions shall be duly reasoned. The interested parties shall be given the opportunity to comment on the draft exemptions within a reasonable period. Any such exemption shall be notified to the Commission.
8.   Member States shall ensure that the undertakings providing or authorised to provide public communications networks that obtain access to information pursuant to this Article take appropriate measures to ensure respect for confidentiality, and operating and business secrets.
