Article 5
Coordination of civil works
1.   Member States shall ensure that every network operator has the right to negotiate agreements concerning the coordination of civil works with undertakings providing or authorised to provide electronic communications networks with a view to deploying elements of high-speed electronic communications networks.
2.   Member States shall ensure that every network operator performing directly or indirectly civil works, either fully or partially financed by public means, meets any reasonable request to coordinate civil works on transparent and non-discriminatory terms, made by undertakings providing or authorised to provide public communications networks with a view to deploying elements of high-speed electronic communications networks. Such request shall be met provided that:
(a)
this will not entail any additional costs, including because of additional delays, for the initially envisaged civil works;
(b)
this will not impede control over the coordination of the works; and
(c)
the request to coordinate is filed as soon as possible and in any case at least one month before the submission of the final project to the competent authorities for permit granting.
Member States may provide rules on apportioning the costs associated with the coordination of civil works.
3.   Where an agreement on the coordination of civil works pursuant to paragraph 2 is not achieved within one month from the date of receipt of the formal request to negotiate, Member States shall ensure that any party is entitled to refer the issue to the competent national dispute settlement body.
4.   Member States shall ensure that the national dispute settlement body referred to in paragraph 3 issues, taking full account of the principle of proportionality, a decision to resolve the dispute initiated pursuant to paragraph 3, including the determination of fair and non-discriminatory terms, conditions and charges where appropriate.
The national dispute settlement body shall resolve the dispute within the shortest possible time frame, and in any case within two months from the date of the receipt of the complete request, except in exceptional circumstances, without prejudice to the possibility for any party to refer the case to a court.
5.   Member States may provide for exemptions from the obligations provided for in this Article for civil works of insignificant importance, such as in terms of value, size or duration, or in the case of critical national infrastructure. Such exemptions shall be duly reasoned. The interested parties shall be given the opportunity to comment on the draft exemptions within a reasonable period. Any such exemption shall be notified to the Commission.
