Article 3
Environmental quality standards
1.   In accordance with Article 1 of this Directive and Article 4 of Directive 2000/60/EC, Member States shall apply the EQS laid down in Part A of Annex I to this Directive for bodies of surface water.
Member States shall apply the EQS for bodies of surface water in accordance with the requirements laid down in Part B of Annex I.
2.   Member States may opt to apply EQS for sediment and/or biota instead of those laid down in Part A of Annex I in certain categories of surface water. Member States that apply this option shall:
(a)
apply, for mercury and its compounds, an EQS of 20 μg/kg, and/or for hexachlorobenzene, an EQS of 10 μg/kg, and/or for hexachlorobutadiene, an EQS of 55 μg/kg, these EQS being for prey tissue (wet weight), choosing the most appropriate indicator from among fish, molluscs, crustaceans and other biota;
(b)
establish and apply EQS other than those mentioned in point (a) for sediment and/or biota for specified substances. These EQS shall offer at least the same level of protection as the EQS for water set out in Part A of Annex I;
(c)
determine, for the substances mentioned in points (a) and (b), the frequency of monitoring in biota and/or sediment. However, monitoring shall take place at least once every year, unless technical knowledge and expert judgment justify another interval; and
(d)
notify the Commission and other Member States, through the Committee referred to in Article 21 of Directive 2000/60/EC, of the substances for which EQS have been established in accordance with point (b), the reasons and basis for using this approach, the alternative EQS established, including the data and the methodology by which alternative EQS were derived, the categories of surface water to which they would apply, and the frequency of monitoring planned, together with the justification for that frequency.
The Commission shall include a summary of notifications pursuant to point (d) above and to note 9 to Part A of Annex I in the reports published in accordance with Article 18 of Directive 2000/60/EC.
3.   Member States shall arrange for the long-term trend analysis of concentrations of those priority substances listed in Part A of Annex I that tend to accumulate in sediment and/or biota, giving particular consideration to substances numbers 2, 5, 6, 7, 12, 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 26, 28 and 30, on the basis of monitoring of water status carried out in accordance with Article 8 of Directive 2000/60/EC. They shall take measures aimed at ensuring, subject to Article 4 of Directive 2000/60/EC, that such concentrations do not significantly increase in sediment and/or relevant biota.
Member States shall determine the frequency of monitoring in sediment and/or biota so as to provide sufficient data for a reliable long-term trend analysis. As a guideline, monitoring should take place every three years, unless technical knowledge and expert judgment justify another interval.
4.   The Commission shall examine technical and scientific progress, including the conclusion of risk assessments as referred to in Article 16(2)(a) and (b) of Directive 2000/60/EC and information from the registration of substances made publicly available according to Article 119 of Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006, and, if necessary, propose that the EQS laid down in Part A of Annex I to this Directive be revised in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 251 of the Treaty in line with the timetable provided for in Article 16(4) of Directive 2000/60/EC.
5.   Point 3 of Part B of Annex I to this Directive may be amended in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 9(3) of this Directive.
