Article 6
Preliminary assessment of the manufacturer
1.   Member States shall not grant any type approval without first ensuring that the manufacturer has put in place satisfactory arrangements and procedures, in accordance with point 3 of Annex IV, to manage properly the reusability, recyclability and recoverability aspects covered by this Directive. When this preliminary assessment has been carried out, a certificate named ‘Certificate of Compliance with Annex IV’ (hereinafter the certificate of compliance) shall be granted to the manufacturer.
2.   In the framework of the preliminary assessment of the manufacturer, Member States shall ensure that the materials used for the construction of a vehicle type comply with the provisions of Article 4(2)(a) of Directive 2000/53/EC.
The Commission shall, in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 9, establish the detailed rules necessary to verify compliance with this provision.
3.   For the purpose of paragraph 1, the manufacturer shall recommend a strategy to ensure dismantling, reuse of component parts, recycling and recovery of materials. The strategy shall take into account the proven technologies available or in development at the time of the application for a vehicle type-approval.
4.   Member States shall appoint a competent body, in accordance with point 2 of Annex IV, to carry out the preliminary assessment of the manufacturer and to issue the certificate of compliance.
5.   The certificate of compliance shall include the appropriate documentation and describe the strategy recommended by the manufacturer. The competent body shall use the model set out in the Appendix to Annex IV.
6.   The certificate of compliance shall remain valid for no less than two years from the date of deliverance of the certificate before new checks shall be conducted.
7.   The manufacturer shall inform the competent body of any significant change that could affect the relevance of the certificate of compliance. After consultation with the manufacturer, the competent body shall decide whether new checks are necessary.
8.   At the end of the period of validity of the certificate of compliance, the competent body shall, as appropriate, issue a new certificate of compliance or extend its validity for a further period of two years. The competent body shall issue a new certificate in cases where significant changes have been brought to the attention of the competent body.
