Article 3
For the purposes of this Regulation, the following definitions shall apply:
(a) "forest" means land with tree crown cover (or equivalent stocking level) of more than 10 % and area of more than 0,5 ha. The trees should be able to reach a minimum height of 5 m at maturity in situ. It may consist either of closed forest formations where trees of various storeys and undergrowth cover a high proportion of the ground, or of open forest formations with a continuous vegetation cover in which tree crown cover exceeds 10 %. Young natural stands and all plantations established for forestry purposes which have yet to reach a crown density of 10 % or tree height of 5 m are included under forest, as are areas normally forming part of the forest area which are temporarily unstocked as a result of human intervention or natural causes but which are expected to revert to forest. The definition of "forest" includes: forest nurseries and seed orchards that constitute an integral part of the forest; forest roads, cleared tracts, firebreaks and other small open areas within the forest; forest in national parks, nature reserves and other protected areas such as those of special environmental, scientific, historical, cultural or spiritual interest; windbreaks and shelterbelts of trees with an area of more than 0,5 ha and a width of more than 20 m. Rubberwood plantations and cork oak stands are included. However, the definition of "forest" excludes: land predominantly used for agricultural practices;
(b) "other wooded land" means land either with a tree crown cover (or equivalent stocking level) of 5 to 10 % of trees able to reach a height of 5 m at maturity in situ, or a crown cover (or equivalent stocking level) of more than 10 % of trees not able to reach a height of 5 m at maturity in situ (e.g. dwarf or stunted trees) and shrub or bush cover. The definition of "other wooded land" excludes: areas having the tree, shrub or bush cover specified above but of less than 0,5 ha and width of 20 m, which are classed under "other land"; land predominantly used for agricultural practices;
(c) "other land" means land not classified as forest or other wooded land as defined in this Regulation, but which nonetheless has been included in forest fire statistics under national law. Such land may include heathland, waste land or agricultural land adjoining or enclosed by forest land;
(d) "forest fire" means fire which breaks out and spreads on forest and other wooded land or which breaks out on other land and spreads to forest and other wooded land. The definition of "forest fire" excludes: prescribed or controlled burning, usually with the aim of reducing or eliminating the quantity of accumulated fuel on the ground;
(e) "geo-referenced" means a reference to a specific geographic area within which data or other information is gathered. The area referred to may be larger than the area or point from which the data/information is gathered, for example in order to ensure anonymity as regards the source of gathered data/information.

SECTION 2 Monitoring and tools to improve and develop the scheme
