Article 12
Redefinition of specifications
1.   After the completion of the relevant parts of the PMP of the UN/ECE, conducted under the auspices of the World Forum for Harmonisation of Vehicle Regulations, the Commission shall, without lowering the level of environmental protection within the Community:
(a)
introduce as an additional control upon emissions of particulate matter particle number based limit values set at a level appropriate to the technologies actually being used at that time to meet the particulate mass limit;
(b)
adopt a measurement procedure for particle number.
The Commission shall also, without lowering the level of environmental protection within the Community, specify a limit value for emissions of NO2 in addition to that for total emissions of NOx, if appropriate. The limit for emissions of NO2 shall be set at a level reflecting the performance of then existing technologies.
Those measures, designed to amend non-essential elements of this Regulation, inter alia, by supplementing it, shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 13(2).
2.   The Commission shall establish correlation factors between the European transient cycle (ETC) and the European steady state cycle (ESC) as described in Directive 2005/55/EC, and the worldwide harmonised transient driving cycle (WHTC) and the worldwide harmonised steady state driving cycle (WHSC) and shall adapt the limit values to that effect. Those measures, designed to amend non-essential elements of this Regulation, inter alia, by supplementing it, shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 13(2).
3.   The Commission shall keep under review the procedures, tests and requirements referred to in Article 5(4) as well as the test cycles used to measure emissions.
If the review finds that those procedures, tests, requirements and test cycles are no longer adequate or no longer reflect actual world emissions, they shall be adapted so as to adequately reflect the emissions generated by real driving on the road. Those measures, designed to amend non-essential elements of this Regulation, inter alia, by supplementing it, shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 13(2).
4.   The Commission shall keep under review the pollutants listed in point 2 of Article 3. If the Commission concludes that it is appropriate to regulate the emissions of additional pollutants, it shall submit to the European Parliament and to the Council a proposal for amending this Regulation.
