Article 7
1. A certificate of conformity, a model of which is shown in Annex IV-A, shall be completed by the manufacturer for each vehicle produced in conformity with the type that has been approved. Such a certificate shall accompany each vehicle. However, Member States may request, after giving at least three months' notice to the Commission and other Member States, for reasons of vehicle taxation or in order to draw up the vehicle registration document, that the certificate of conformity shall contain details other than those mentioned in Annex IV-A, provided that those details are explicitly included in the information document.
The certificate of conformity shall be made in such a way as to prevent any forgery. For this purpose, the printing shall be made on paper protected either by coloured graphics or watermarked with the vehicle manufacturer's identification mark.
2. A certificate of conformity, a model of which is shown in Annex IV-B, shall be completed by the manufacturer for each non-original separate technical unit or component manufactured in conformity with the approved type. That certificate is not required for original separate technical units or components.
3. Where the separate technical unit or component to be type-approved performs its function or displays a specific characteristic only in conjunction with other components of the vehicle and for this reason compliance with one or more requirements can be verified only when that separate technical unit or component to be approved functions in conjunction with other vehicle components whether real or simulated, the scope of the type-approval of that separate technical unit or component must be restricted accordingly. The type-approval certificate for a separate technical unit or component shall then set out any restrictions on use and any instructions for fitting it. Compliance with these restrictions and requirements shall be verified when the vehicle is type-approved.
4. Without prejudice to paragraph 2, the holder of a type-approval for a separate technical unit or component that has been granted under Article 4 shall be obliged to affix to each such separate technical unit or component manufactured in conformity with the approved type, his factory or trade mark, a statement of the type and, if the separate directive so requires, the type-approval mark referred to in Article 8. In this latter case, he is not required to complete the certificate provided for in paragraph 2.
5. Any holder of a type-approval certificate for a separate technical unit or component which, under paragraph 3, contains restrictions on use, must supply detailed information on those restrictions and must give fitting instructions, where appropriate, with each separate technical unit or component manufactured.
6. Any holder of a type-approval certificate for a separate technical unit of non-original equipment, issued in connection with one or more types of vehicle, must with each such unit supply detailed information allowing those vehicles to be identified.

