Article 4
1. Each Member State shall grant type-approval to all types of vehicle, systems, separate technical units or components if these meet the following conditions:
(a) the type of vehicle meets the technical requirements of the separate directives and is as described by the manufacturer in accordance with the data provided for in the exhaustive list set out in Annex I;
(b) the system, separate technical unit or component meets the technical requirements of the relevant separate directive and is as described by the manufacturer in accordance with the data provided for in the exhaustive list set out in Annex I.
2. Before conducting type-approval, the competent authorities in the Member State which carry out these operations shall take all necessary steps to ensure, if necessary in cooperation with the competent authorities in the Member State where manufacturing takes place or the product is brought into the Community, that there is compliance with the provisions of Annex VI in order that the new vehicles, systems, separate technical units or components manufactured, placed on the market, offered for sale or put into service, conform to the approved type.
3. The competent authorities referred to in paragraph 2 shall ensure, if necessary in cooperation with the competent authorities in the Member State where manufacturing takes place or the product is brought into the Community, that the provisions of Annex VI continue to be observed.
4. Where an application for type-approval for a type of vehicle is accompanied by one or more type-approval certificates of a system, separate technical or component unit issued by one or more Member States, the Member State conducting type-approval for a type of vehicle shall be obliged to accept them and shall not perform, in respect of the systems, separate technical units and/or components which have been type-approved, the checks required by paragraph 1(b).
5. Each Member State shall be responsible for the type-approval of a system, separate technical unit or component that it grants. The competent authorities in the Member State which grant type-approval for a type of vehicle shall check conformity of production, where necessary in cooperation with those competent authorities in the other Member States which have issued type-approval certificates for systems, separate technical unit or components.
6. However, if a Member State finds that a vehicle, system, separate technical unit or component which complies with the provisions of paragraph 1 is nevertheless a serious risk to road safety, it may refuse to grant the type-approval. It shall forthwith inform the other Member States and the Commission thereof, stating the reasons on which its decision is based.

