Article 9
1. The manufacturer shall be responsible for the manufacture of each vehicle or the production of each system, separate technical unit or component in compliance with the approved type. The final cessation of production or any changes to the information contained in the information document must be notified by the type-approval holder to the competent authorities in the Member State which issued that type-approval.
2. If the competent authorities of the Member State referred to in paragraph 1 consider that a change of this type does not involve any change to the existing type-approval certificate, or the drawing up of a new type-approval certificate, they shall inform the manufacturer accordingly.
3. If the competent authorities in the Member State referred to in paragraph 1 confirm that a change in the information set out in the information document justifies new checks or new tests, they shall inform the manufacturer accordingly and shall perform those tests. Should the checks or tests involve amendments to the existing type-approval certificate or the drawing up of a new certificate, the authorities shall inform the competent authorities of the other Member States in accordance with Article 6.
4. Where the particulars appearing in the information document for vehicle approval have changed, the manufacturer shall issue revised pages to the approval authority showing clearly the nature of the change and the date of re-issue. Only where the changes made to the information document necessitate the amendment of one or more of the entries given in the certificate of conformity in Annex IV (except items 19.1 and 45 to 51 inclusive), shall the reference number on the information document be changed.
5. Where a type-approval certificate ceases to have effect as a result of final cessation of production of the type of vehicle which has been approved or of the system or of the separate technical unit or component which has been type-approved, the competent authorities in the Member State which have carried out that type-approval shall inform the competent authorities in the other Member States within one month.

