Article 15
Co-financing rates
1.   For studies, the amount of Union financial support shall not exceed 50 % of the total eligible cost. For studies financed with the amounts transferred from the Cohesion Fund, the maximum co-financing rates shall be those applicable to the Cohesion Fund as specified in paragraph 2, point (c).
2.   For works in the transport sector, the following maximum co-financing rates shall apply:
(a)
for works relating to the specific objectives referred to in Article 3(2), point (a)(i), the amount of Union financial support shall not exceed 30 % of the total eligible cost; however, the co-financing rates may be increased to a maximum of 50 % for the actions:
(i)
relating to cross-border links under the conditions specified in point (e) of this paragraph;
(ii)
supporting telematic applications systems;
(iii)
supporting inland waterways or railway interoperability;
(iv)
supporting new technologies and innovation;
(v)
supporting improvements in infrastructure for safety; and
(vi)
adapting the transport infrastructure for Union external border checks purposes, in accordance with relevant Union law;
(b)
for works relating to the specific objectives referred to in Article 3(2), point (a)(ii), the amount of Union financial support shall not exceed 50 % of the total eligible cost; however, the co-financing rates may be increased to a maximum of 85 % if the necessary resources are transferred to the CEF pursuant to Article 4(13);
(c)
as regards the amounts transferred from the Cohesion Fund, the maximum co-financing rates shall not exceed 85 % of the total eligible costs;
(d)
as regards the amounts from the European Strategic Investment heading of EUR 1 559 800 000, as referred to in Part II, first paragraph, first indent, of the Annex, for the completion of missing major cross-border railway links between Member States eligible for funding from the Cohesion Fund, the maximum co-financing rates shall not exceed 85 % of the total eligible costs;
(e)
as regards actions relating to cross-border links, the increased maximum co-financing rates provided for in points (a), (c) and (d) of this paragraph may only apply to actions that demonstrate a high degree of integration in the planning and implementation of the action for the purpose of the award criterion referred to in Article 14(1), point (c), for instance through the establishment of a single project company, a joint governance structure, a bilateral legal framework or by an implementing act pursuant to Article 47 of Regulation (EU) No 1315/2013; in addition, the co-financing rate applicable to projects carried out by integrated management structures, including joint ventures, in accordance with Article 11(2), point (a), may be increased by 5 %.
3.   For works in the energy sector, the following maximum co-financing rates shall apply:
(a)
for works relating to the specific objectives referred to in Article 3(2), point (b), the amount of Union financial support shall not exceed 50 % of the total eligible cost;
(b)
the co-financing rates may be increased to a maximum of 75 % of the total eligible cost for actions contributing to the development of projects of common interest which, based on the evidence referred to in Article 14(2) of Regulation (EU) No 347/2013, provide a high degree of regional or Union-wide security of supply, strengthen the solidarity of the Union or offer highly innovative solutions.
4.   For works in the digital sector, the following maximum co-financing rates shall apply: for works relating to the specific objectives referred to in Article 3(2), point (c), the amount of Union financial support shall not exceed 30 % of the total eligible cost.
The co-financing rates may be increased:
(a)
up to 50 % for actions with a strong cross-border dimension, such as uninterrupted coverage with 5G systems along major transport paths or deployment of backbone networks between Member States and between the Union and third countries; and
(b)
up to 75 % for actions implementing the Gigabit connectivity of socioeconomic drivers.
Actions providing local wireless connectivity in local communities, when implemented via low value grants, may be funded by Union financial support covering up to 100 % of the eligible costs, without prejudice to the principle of co-financing.
5.   The maximum co-funding rate applicable to actions referred to in Article 10(1) shall be the highest maximum co-funding rate applicable to the sectors concerned. In addition, the co-financing rate applicable to those actions may be increased by 10 %.
6.   In each of the transport, energy and digital sectors, as regards works undertaken in outermost regions, a specific maximum co-funding rate of 70 % shall apply.
