Article 14
Award criteria
1.   Transparent award criteria shall be laid down in the work programmes referred to in Article 20 and in the calls for proposals, taking into account, to the extent applicable, only the following elements:
(a)
economic, social and environmental impact, including climate impact (project life cycle benefits and costs), soundness, comprehensiveness and transparency of the analysis;
(b)
innovation and digitalisation, safety, interoperability and accessibility aspects, including for persons with reduced mobility;
(c)
cross-border dimension, network integration and territorial accessibility, including for European islands and outermost regions;
(d)
Union added value;
(e)
synergies between the transport, energy and digital sectors;
(f)
maturity of the action in the light of the development of the project;
(g)
soundness of the maintenance strategy proposed for the project upon completion;
(h)
soundness of the implementation plan proposed;
(i)
catalytic effect of Union financial support on investment;
(j)
need to overcome financial obstacles such as those caused by insufficient commercial viability, high upfront costs or the lack of market finance;
(k)
potential for dual use in the context of military mobility;
(l)
consistency with Union and national energy and climate plans, including the “energy efficiency first” principle.
2.   The assessment of proposals against the award criteria shall take into account, where relevant, the resilience to the adverse impacts of climate change through a climate vulnerability and risk assessment, including the relevant adaptation measures.
3.   The assessment of proposals against the award criteria shall, where relevant, as specified in the work programmes, ensure that actions supported by the CEF that include PNT technology are technically compatible with the Galileo and EGNOS programmes and with the Copernicus programme.
4.   As regards actions relating to the transport sector, the assessment of proposals against the award criteria shall, where applicable, ensure that proposed actions are consistent with the corridor work plans and implementing acts pursuant to Article 47 of Regulation (EU) No 1315/2013 and that they take into account the consultative opinion of the responsible European Coordinator pursuant to Article 45(8) thereof. The assessment shall also consider whether the implementation of actions financed by the CEF risks causing disruption to freight and passenger flows on the section of the line concerned by the project and whether those risks have been mitigated.
5.   As regards actions relating to cross-border projects in the field of renewable energy, the award criteria shall take into account the conditions laid down in Article 7(4).
6.   As regards actions relating to projects of common interest in the field of digital connectivity, the award criteria set out in the work programmes and the calls for proposals shall take into account the criteria laid down in Article 8(4).
