Article 11
Eligible entities
1.   As regards entities, the eligibility criteria set out in this Article shall apply in addition to the criteria set out in Article 197 of the Financial Regulation.
2.   The following entities shall be eligible:
(a)
legal entities established in:
(i)
a Member State, including joint ventures;
(ii)
a third country associated to the CEF; or
(iii)
an overseas country or territory;
(b)
legal entities created under Union law and, if provided for in the work programmes, international organisations.
3.   Natural persons shall not be eligible.
4.   The work programmes may provide that legal entities established in third countries associated to the CEF in accordance with Article 5, and legal entities established in the Union but directly or indirectly controlled by third countries or nationals of third countries or by entities established in third countries, are not eligible to participate in all or some of the actions under the specific objectives set out in Article 3(2), point (c), for duly justified security reasons. In such cases, calls for proposals and calls for tenders shall be restricted to entities established, or deemed to be established, in Member States and directly or indirectly controlled by Member States or by nationals of Member States.
5.   Legal entities established in a third country which is not associated to the CEF shall exceptionally be eligible to receive Union financial support under the CEF where this is indispensable for the achievement of the objectives of a given project of common interest in the transport, energy and digital sectors or of a cross-border project in the field of renewable energy.
6.   To be eligible, proposals shall be submitted:
(a)
by one or more Member States; or
(b)
with the agreement of the Member States concerned, by international organisations, joint undertakings, or by public or private undertakings or bodies, including regional or local authorities.
If the Member State concerned does not agree with a submission under point (b) of the first subparagraph, it shall communicate that information accordingly.
A Member State may decide that, for a specific work programme or for specific categories of applications, proposals may be submitted without its agreement. In such case, this shall, at the request of the Member State concerned, be indicated in the relevant work programme and in the call for such proposals.
