Article 10
Delegated acts
1.   The Commission shall lay down details relating to the label and the fiche by means of delegated acts in accordance with Articles 11 to 13, relating to each type of product in accordance with this Article.
Where a product meets the criteria listed in paragraph 2, it shall be covered by a delegated act in accordance with paragraph 4.
Provisions in delegated acts regarding information provided on the label and in the fiche on the consumption of energy and other essential resources during use shall enable end-users to make better informed purchasing decisions and shall enable market surveillance authorities to verify whether products comply with the information provided.
Where a delegated act lays down provisions with respect to both energy efficiency and consumption of essential resources of a product, the design and content of the label shall emphasise the energy efficiency of the product.
2.   The criteria referred to in paragraph 1 are the following:
(a)
according to most recently available figures and considering the quantities placed on the Union market, the products shall have a significant potential for saving energy and, where relevant, other essential resources;
(b)
products with equivalent functionality available on the market shall have a wide disparity in the relevant performance levels;
(c)
the Commission shall take into account relevant Union legislation and self-regulation, such as voluntary agreements, which are expected to achieve the policy objectives more quickly or at lesser expense than mandatory requirements.
3.   In preparing a draft delegated act, the Commission shall:
(a)
take into account those environmental parameters set out in Annex I, Part 1, to Directive 2009/125/EC which are identified as significant in the relevant implementing measure adopted under Directive 2009/125/EC and which are relevant for the end-user during use;
(b)
assess the impact of the act on the environment, end-users and manufacturers, including small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), in terms of competitiveness including on markets outside the Union, innovation, market access and costs and benefits;
(c)
carry out appropriate consultation with stakeholders;
(d)
set implementing date(s), any staged or transitional measures or periods, taking into account in particular possible impacts on SMEs or on specific product groups manufactured primarily by SMEs.
4.   The delegated acts shall specify in particular:
(a)
the exact definition of the type of products to be included;
(b)
the measurement standards and methods to be used in obtaining the information referred to in Article 1(1);
(c)
the details of the technical documentation required pursuant to Article 5;
(d)
the design and content of the label referred to in Article 4, which as far as possible shall have uniform design characteristics across product groups and shall in all cases be clearly visible and legible. The format of the label shall retain as a basis the classification using letters from A to G; the steps of the classification shall correspond to significant energy and cost savings from the end-user perspective.
Three additional classes may be added to the classification if required by technological progress. Those additional classes will be A+, A++, and A+++ for the most efficient class. In principle the total number of classes will be limited to seven, unless more classes are still populated.
The colour scale shall consist of no more than seven different colours from dark green to red. The colour code of only the highest class shall always be dark green. If there are more than seven classes, only the red colour can be duplicated.
The classification shall be reviewed in particular when a significant proportion of products on the internal market achieves the two highest energy efficiency classes and when additional savings may be achieved by further differentiating products.
Detailed criteria for a possible reclassification of products are, where appropriate, to be determined on a case-by-case basis in the relevant delegated act;
(e)
the location where the label shall be fixed to the product displayed and the manner in which the label and/or information are to be provided in the case of offers for sale as covered by Article 7. Where appropriate, the delegated acts may provide for the label to be attached to the product or printed on the packaging, or for the details of the labelling requirements for printing in catalogues, for distance selling and Internet sales;
(f)
the content and, where appropriate, the format and other details concerning the fiche or further information specified in Article 4 and Article 5(c). The information on the label shall also be included on the fiche;
(g)
the specific content of the label for advertising, including, as appropriate, the energy class and other relevant performance level(s) of the given product in a legible and visible form;
(h)
the duration of label classification(s), where appropriate, in accordance with point (d);
(i)
the level of accuracy in the declarations on the label and fiches;
(j)
the date for the evaluation and possible revision of the delegated act, taking into account the speed of technological progress.
