Article 38
Limitation of the impact of fishing on the marine environment and adaptation of fishing to the protection of species
1.   In order to reduce the impact of fishing on the marine environment, to foster the gradual elimination of discards and to facilitate the transition to a sustainable exploitation of living marine biological resources in accordance with Article 2(2) of Regulation (EU) No 1380/2013, the EMFF may support investments:
(a)
in equipment improving size selectivity or species selectivity of fishing gear;
(b)
on board or in equipment that eliminates discards by avoiding and reducing unwanted catches of commercial stocks, or that deals with unwanted catches to be landed in accordance with Article 15 of Regulation (EU) No 1380/2013;
(c)
in equipment that limits and, where possible, eliminates the physical and biological impacts of fishing on the ecosystem or the sea bed;
(d)
in equipment that protects gear and catches from mammals and birds protected by Council Directive 92/43/EEC or Directive 2009/147/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (28), provided that it does not undermine the selectivity of the fishing gear and that all appropriate measures are introduced to avoid physical damage to the predators.
2.   By way of derogation from point (a) of Article 11, in the outermost regions the support referred to in paragraph 1 may be granted for anchored fish aggregating devices, provided that such devices contribute to sustainable and selective fishing.
3.   Support shall not be granted more than once during the programming period for the same type of equipment on the same Union fishing vessel.
4.   Support shall only be granted where the gear or other equipment referred to in paragraph 1 has a demonstrably better size-selection or a demonstrably lower impact on the ecosystem and on non-target species than the standard gear or other equipment permitted under Union law, or under relevant national law adopted in the context of regionalisation as provided for in Regulation (EU) No 1380/2013.
5.   Support shall be granted to:
(a)
owners of Union fishing vessels which are registered as active vessels and which have carried out fishing activities at sea of at least 60 days during the two calendar years preceding the date of submission of the application for support;
(b)
fishermen who own the gear to be replaced and who have worked on board of a Union fishing vessel for at least 60 days during the two calendar years preceding the date of submission of the application for support;
(c)
organisations of fishermen recognised by the Member State.
