Article 67
Storage aid
1.   The EMFF may support compensation to recognised producer organisations and associations of producers organisations which store fishery products listed in Annex II to Regulation (EU) No 1379/2013, provided that those products are stored in accordance with Articles 30 and 31 of that Regulation and subject to the following conditions:
(a)
the amount of the storage aid does not exceed the amount of the technical and financial costs of the actions required for the stabilisation and storage of the products in question;
(b)
the quantities eligible for storage aid do not exceed 15 % of the annual quantities of the products concerned put up for sale by the producer organisation;
(c)
the financial support per year does not exceed 2 % of the average annual value of the production placed on the market by the members of the producer organisation in the period 2009-2011.
For the purposes of point (c) of the first subparagraph, where a member of the producer organisation did not have any production placed on the market in the period 2009 to 2011, the average annual value of production placed on the market in the first three years of production of that member shall be taken into account.
2.   The support referred to in paragraph 1 shall end by 31 December 2018.
3.   The support referred to in paragraph 1 shall only be granted once the products are released for human consumption.
4.   Member States shall fix the amount of the technical and financial costs applicable in their territories as follows:
(a)
technical costs shall be calculated each year on the basis of direct costs relating to the actions required in order to stabilise and store the products in question;
(b)
financial costs shall be calculated each year using the interest rate set annually in each Member State;
These technical and financial costs shall be made publicly available.
5.   Member States shall carry out controls to ensure that the products benefiting from storage aid fulfil the conditions laid down in this Article. For the purposes of such controls, beneficiaries of storage aid shall keep stock records for each category of products entered into storage and later reintroduced onto the market for human consumption.
