Article 44
Inland fishing and inland aquatic fauna and flora
1.   In order to reduce the impact of inland fishing on the environment, to increase energy efficiency, to increase the value or quality of fish landed, or to improve health, safety, working conditions, human capital and training, the EMFF may support investments in the following:
(a)
the promotion of human capital, job creation and social dialogue as referred to in Article 29 and under the conditions set out in that Article;
(b)
on board or in individual equipment as referred to in Article 32 and under the conditions set out in that Article;
(c)
in equipment and types of operations as referred to in Articles 38 and 39 and under the conditions set out in those Articles;
(d)
the improvement of energy efficiency and the mitigation of the effects of climate change as referred to in Article 41 and under the conditions set out in that Article;
(e)
the improvement of the value or quality of the fish caught as referred to in Article 42 and under the conditions set out in that Article.
(f)
in fishing ports, shelters and landing sites as referred to in Article 43 and under the conditions set out in that Article;
2.   The EMFF may provide support for investments relating to business start-ups for young fishermen as referred to in Article 31 and under the same conditions as set out in that Article, except for the requirement under point (b) of paragraph 2 of that Article.
3.   The EMFF may provide support for the development and facilitation of innovation in accordance with Article 26, for the advisory services in accordance with Article 27 and for partnerships between scientists and fishermen in accordance with Article 28.
4.   In order to promote diversification by inland fishermen, the EMFF may support the diversification of inland fishing activities to complementary activities under the conditions laid down in Article 30.
5.   For the purposes of paragraph 1:
(a)
references made in Articles 30, 32, 38, 39, 41 and 42 to fishing vessels shall be understood as references to vessels operating exclusively in inland waters;
(b)
references made in Article 38 to the marine environment shall be understood as references to the environment in which the inland fishing vessel operates.
6.   In order to protect and develop aquatic fauna and flora, the EMFF may support:
(a)
the management, restoration and monitoring of NATURA 2000 sites which are affected by fishing activities, and the rehabilitation of inland waters in accordance with Directive 2000/60/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (30), including spawning grounds and migration routes for migratory species, without prejudice to point (e) of Article 40(1) of this Regulation and, where relevant, with the participation of inland fishermen;
(b)
the construction, modernisation or installation of static or movable facilities intended to protect and enhance aquatic fauna and flora, including their scientific preparation, monitoring and evaluation.
7.   Member States shall ensure that vessels receiving support under this Article continue to operate exclusively in inland waters.
