Article 41
Energy efficiency and mitigation of climate change
1.   In order to mitigate the effects of climate change and to improve the energy efficiency of fishing vessels, the EMFF may support:
(a)
investments in equipment or on board aimed at reducing the emission of pollutants or greenhouse gases and increasing the energy efficiency of fishing vessels. Investments in fishing gear are also eligible provided that they do not undermine the selectivity of that fishing gear;
(b)
energy efficiency audits and schemes;
(c)
studies to assess the contribution of alternative propulsion systems and hull designs to the energy efficiency of fishing vessels.
2.   Support for the replacement or modernisation of main or ancillary engines may be granted only:
(a)
for vessels up to 12 metres in overall length, provided that the new or modernised engine does not have more power in kW than the current engine;
(b)
for vessels between 12 and 18 metres in overall length, provided that the power in kW of the new or modernised engine is at least 20 % lower than that of the current engine;
(c)
for vessels between 18 and 24 metres in overall length, provided that the power in kW of the new or modernised engine is at least 30 % lower than that of the current engine.
3.   Support under paragraph 2 for the replacement or modernisation of main or ancillary engines may only be granted in respect of vessels belonging to a fleet segment for which the report on fishing capacity, referred to in Article 22(2) of Regulation (EU) No 1380/2013, has shown a balance with the fishing opportunities available to that segment.
4.   Support under paragraph 2 of this Article shall only be granted for the replacement or modernisation of main or ancillary engines which have been officially certified in accordance with Article 40(2) of Regulation (EC) No 1224/2009. It shall only be paid after any required reduction of capacity in kW has been permanently removed from the Union fishing fleet register.
5.   For fishing vessels not subject to a certification of engine power, support under paragraph 2 of this Article shall only be granted for the replacement or modernisation of main or ancillary engines in respect of which the consistency of engine power has been verified in accordance with Article 41 of Regulation (EC) No 1224/2009 and which have been physically inspected to ensure that the engine power does not exceed the engine power established in the fishing licenses.
6.   The reduction of engine power referred to in points(b) and (c) of paragraph 2 may be achieved by a group of vessels for each category of vessel referred to in those points.
7.   Without prejudice to Article 25(3), support from the EMFF under paragraph 2 of this Article shall not exceed the higher of the following two thresholds:
(a)
EUR 1 500 000; or
(b)
3 % of the Union financial support allocated by the Member State to the Union priorities set out in Article 6(1), (2) and (5).
8.   Applications made by operators from the small–scale coastal fishing sector shall be treated as a priority up to 60 % of the total support allocated for the replacement or modernisation of main or ancillary engines referred to in paragraph 2 over the entire programming period.
9.   Support under paragraphs 1 and 2 shall only be granted to owners of fishing vessels and shall not be granted more than once for the same type of investment during the programming period for the same fishing vessel.
10.   The Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts, in accordance with Article 126, specifying the costs which are eligible for support under point (a) of paragraph 1 of this Article.
