Article 39
Innovation linked to the conservation of marine biological resources
1.   In order to contribute to the gradual elimination of discards and by–catches and to facilitate the transition to exploitation of living marine biological resources in accordance with Article 2(2) of Regulation (EU) No 1380/2013, and to reduce the impact of fishing on the marine environment and the impact of protected predators, the EMFF may support operations aimed at developing or introducing new technical or organisational knowledge that reduces the impact of fishing activities on the environment, including improved fishing techniques and gear selectivity, or aimed at achieving a more sustainable use of marine biological resources and coexistence with protected predators.
2.   Operations financed under this Article shall be carried out by, or in collaboration with, a scientific or technical body recognised by the Member State which shall validate the results of such operations.
3.   The results of operations financed under this Article shall be adequately publicised by the Member State in accordance with Article 119.
4.   Fishing vessels involved in projects financed under this Article shall not exceed 5 % of the number of vessels of the national fleet or 5 % of the national fleet tonnage in gross tonnage, calculated at the time of submission of the application. At the request of a Member State, in duly justified circumstances and on the basis of a recommendation by the Scientific, Technical and Economic Committee for Fisheries (STECF) established by Commission Decision 2005/629/EC (29), the Commission may approve projects that exceed the limits set out in this paragraph.
5.   Operations which do not qualify as fishing for scientific purposes in accordance with Article 33 of Regulation (EC) No 1224/2009 and which consist of testing new fishing gear or techniques shall be carried out within the limits of the fishing opportunities allocated to the Member State concerned.
6.   The net revenue generated by the participation of the fishing vessel in the operation shall be deducted from the eligible expenditure of the operation in accordance with Article 65(8) of Regulation (EU) No 1303/2013.
7.   For the purpose of paragraph 6, the term ‘net revenue’ means the income of fishermen from the first sale of the fish or shellfish caught during the introduction and testing of the new technical or organisational knowledge less the selling costs such as auction hall fees.
