Article 29
Promotion of human capital, job creation and social dialogue
1.   In order to promote human capital, job creation and social dialogue, the EMFF may support:
(a)
professional training, lifelong learning, joint projects, the dissemination of knowledge of an economic, technical, regulatory or scientific nature and of innovative practices, and the acquisition of new professional skills, in particular linked to the sustainable management of marine ecosystems, hygiene, health, safety, activities in the maritime sector, innovation and entrepreneurship;
(b)
networking and exchange of experiences and best practices between stakeholders, including among organisations promoting equal opportunities between men and women, promoting the role of women in fishing communities and promoting under-represented groups involved in small-scale coastal fishing or in on-foot fishing;
(c)
social dialogue at Union, national, regional or local level involving fishermen, social partners and other relevant stakeholders.
2.   The support referred to in paragraph 1 may also be granted to spouses of self-employed fishermen or, where and in so far as recognised by national law, the life partners of self-employed fishermen, under the conditions laid down in point (b) of Article 2 of Directive 2010/41/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council (26).
3.   The support referred to in point (a) of paragraph 1 may be granted, for a maximum period of two years, for the training of people under 30 years of age, who are recognised as unemployed by the Member State concerned (‘trainees’). Such support shall be limited to training on board a small–scale coastal fishing vessel owned by a professional fisherman of at least 50 years of age, formalised by a contract between the trainee and the owner of the vessel that is recognised by the Member State concerned, including courses on sustainable fishing practices and the conservation of marine biological resources as defined in Regulation (EU) No 1380/2013. The trainee shall be accompanied on board by a professional fisherman of at least 50 years of age.
4.   Support under paragraph 3 shall be granted to professional fishermen to cover the trainee’s salary and related charges, and shall be calculated in accordance with Article 67(5) of Regulation (EU) No 1303/2013, taking into account the economic situation and living standards of the Member State concerned. That support shall not exceed a maximum amount of EUR 40 000 for each beneficiary during the programming period.
