Article 13
Monitoring of implementation
1.   Without prejudice to Directives 2003/4/EC and 2007/2/EC, Member States shall draw up and publish a report containing:
(a)
information on the application of this Regulation, including information on enforcement activities, infringements and penalties;
(b)
information compiled from the notifications received pursuant to Article 4(2) and (3), Article 5(2) and point (b)(iv) of Article 7(4);
(c)
information compiled from the release inventories drawn up pursuant to Article 6(1);
(d)
information on implementation in accordance with the national implementation plans drawn up pursuant to Article 9(2);
(e)
information on the presence of substances listed in Part A of Annex III in the environment, as compiled pursuant to Article 10;
(f)
annual monitoring and statistical data on the actual or estimated total manufacturing and placing on the market of any substance listed in Annex I or II, including relevant indicators, overview maps, reports.
Member States shall update the report annually as far as new data or information is available and otherwise at least every three years.
Members States shall give the Commission and the Agency access to the information contained in the reports.
2.   Where a Member State shares the information referred to in point (e) of paragraph 1 with the Information Platform for Chemical Monitoring, this shall be indicated by that Member State in its report and the Member State shall be considered to have fulfilled its reporting obligations under that point.
Where the information referred to in point (e) of paragraph 1 is contained in the report of a Member State provided to the Agency, the Agency shall use the Information Platform for Chemical Monitoring for compiling, storing and sharing that information.
3.   Regarding the substances listed in the Convention, the Commission, supported by the Agency, shall, at the intervals determined by the Conference of the Parties of the Convention, compile a report on the basis of the information provided by the Member States to the Agency in accordance with point (f) of paragraph 1 and communicate it to the Secretariat of the Convention.
4.   The Agency shall compile and publish a Union overview report on the basis of the data referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 that is published or notified by the Member States. The Union overview report shall include, as appropriate, indicators for outputs, results and impact of this Regulation, Union overview maps and Member State reports. The Union overview report shall be updated by the Agency at least once every six months or following receipt of a request from the Commission.
5.   The Commission may adopt implementing acts concerning the minimum information to be provided in accordance with paragraph 1, including the definition of relevant indicators, overview maps and reports referred to in point (f) of paragraph 1. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 20(3).
