Article 4
Exemptions from control measures
1.   Article 3 shall not apply in the case of:
(a)
a substance used for laboratory-scale research or as a reference standard;
(b)
a substance present as an unintentional trace contaminant, as specified in the relevant entries of Annex I or II, in substances, mixtures or articles.
2.   For a substance added to Annex I or II after 15 July 2019, Article 3 shall not apply for a six-month period if that substance is present in articles produced before or on the date that this Regulation becomes applicable to that substance.
Article 3 shall not apply in the case of a substance present in articles already in use before or on the date that this Regulation or Regulation (EC) No 850/2004 became applicable to that substance, whichever date came first.
Immediately upon becoming aware of articles as referred to in the first and second subparagraph, a Member State shall inform the Commission and the Agency accordingly.
Whenever the Commission is so informed or otherwise learns of such articles, it shall, where appropriate, notify the Secretariat of the Convention accordingly without further delay.
3.   Where a substance is listed in Part A of Annex I or in Part A of Annex II, a Member State wishing to permit, until the deadline specified in the relevant Annex, the manufacturing and use of that substance as a closed-system site-limited intermediate shall notify accordingly the Secretariat of the Convention.
Such notification may be made only if the following conditions are satisfied:
(a)
following the request of a Member State or on the Commission's own initiative, an annotation has been entered in the relevant Annex, by means of a delegated act adopted on the basis of the fourth subparagraph;
(b)
the manufacturer demonstrates to the competent authority of the Member State in which the manufacturer is established that the manufacturing process will transform the substance into one or more other substances that do not exhibit the characteristics of a POP, ensuring that it is rigorously contained by technical means during its whole life cycle;
(c)
the manufacturer demonstrates to the competent authority of the Member State in which the manufacturer is established that the substance is a closed-system site-limited intermediate and that it is not expected that either humans or the environment will be exposed to any significant quantities of the substance during its production and use;
(d)
the manufacturer informs the Member State on the details of actual or estimated total manufacturing and use of the substance concerned and the nature of the closed-system site-limited process, specifying the amount of any non-transformed and unintentional trace contamination by any POP starting material in the final substance, mixture or article.
Within one month of submission of the notification to the Secretariat of the Convention, the Member State shall communicate the notification to the other Member States, to the Commission and the Agency, and shall give details of actual or estimated total manufacturing and use of the substance concerned and the nature of the closed-system site-limited process, specifying the amount of any non-transformed and unintentional trace contamination by any POP starting material in the final substance, mixture or article.
The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 18 in order to amend Annexes I and II by entering annotations expressly to the effect that manufacturing and use, as a closed-system site-limited intermediate, of a substance listed in Part A of the relevant Annex may be permitted, and to amend the deadlines in such annotations in cases where, following a repeat notification from the Member State concerned to the Secretariat of the Convention, express or tacit consent is issued under the Convention for the continued manufacturing and use of the substance for another period.
4.   Waste consisting of, containing or contaminated by any substance listed in Annex IV is regulated by Article 7.
