Article 7
Waste management
1.   Producers and holders of waste shall undertake all reasonable efforts to avoid, where feasible, contamination of this waste with substances listed in Annex IV.
2.   Notwithstanding Council Directive 96/59/EC (24), waste consisting of, containing or contaminated by any substance listed in Annex IV to this Regulation shall be disposed of or recovered, without undue delay and in accordance with Part 1 of Annex V to this Regulation, in such a way as to ensure that the POP content is destroyed or irreversibly transformed so that the remaining waste and releases do not exhibit the characteristics of POPs.
In carrying out such a disposal or recovery, any substance listed in Annex IV may be isolated from the waste, provided that this substance is subsequently disposed of in accordance with the first subparagraph.
3.   Disposal or recovery operations that may lead to recovery, recycling, reclamation or re-use on their own of the substances listed in Annex IV shall be prohibited.
4.   By way of derogation from paragraph 2:
(a)
waste containing or contaminated by any substance listed in Annex IV may be otherwise disposed of or recovered in accordance with the relevant Union legislation, provided that the content of the listed substances in the waste is below the concentration limits specified in Annex IV;
(b)
a Member State or the competent authority designated by that Member State may, in exceptional cases, allow wastes listed in Part 2 of Annex V containing or contaminated by a substance listed in Annex IV up to concentration limits specified in Part 2 of Annex V to be otherwise dealt with in accordance with a method listed in Part 2 of Annex V, provided that the following conditions are fulfilled:
(i)
the holder concerned has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the competent authority of the Member State concerned that decontamination of the waste in relation to substances listed in Annex IV was not feasible, and that destruction or irreversible transformation of the POP content, performed in accordance with best environmental practice or best available techniques, does not represent the environmentally preferable option and the competent authority has subsequently authorised the alternative operation;
(ii)
the holder concerned has provided information on the POP content of the waste to the competent authority;
(iii)
the operation is in accordance with relevant Union legislation and with the conditions laid down in relevant additional measures referred to in paragraph 5;
(iv)
the Member State concerned has informed the other Member States, the Agency and the Commission of its authorisation and the justification for it.
5.   The Commission may, where appropriate, and taking into consideration technical developments and relevant international guidelines and decisions and any authorisations granted by a Member State, or by the competent authority designated by that Member State in accordance with paragraph 4 and Annex V, adopt implementing acts concerning the implementation of this Article. In particular, the Commission may specify the format of the information to be submitted by Member States in accordance with point (b)(iv) of paragraph 4. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 20(3).
6.   Member States shall take the necessary measures to ensure the control and traceability, in accordance with Article 17 of Directive 2008/98/EC, of waste containing or contaminated by a substance listed in Annex IV to this Regulation.
