Article 8
Transmission of results
1.   Member States shall transmit the results provided for in Article 7 of this Regulation, including confidential data, to the Commission (Eurostat) in accordance with the existing Community provisions on transmission of data subject to statistical confidentiality, in particular Council Regulation (Euratom, EEC) No 1588/90 (10). Those Community provisions shall apply to the treatment of the results, in so far as they include confidential data.
2.   The results shall be transmitted in an appropriate technical format, within a period of time starting from the end of the reference period, which shall be laid down in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 12(3) for the modules provided for in Article 3(2)(a) to (h) and (j) and shall be no longer than 18 months. For the module provided for in Article 3(2)(i), the period of time shall be no longer than 30 months or 18 months as laid down in Annex IX, Section 9. In addition, a small number of estimated preliminary results shall be transmitted within a period of time starting from the end of the reference period which shall be laid down in accordance with that procedure for the modules provided for in Article 3(2)(a) to (g) and shall be no longer than 10 months. For the module provided for in Article 3(2)(i), the period of time for preliminary results shall be no longer than 18 months.
3.   In order to minimise the burden on businesses and the costs to the national statistical authorities, the Member States may mark data for use as a contribution to European totals only (CETO). Eurostat shall not publish those data, nor shall Member States mark nationally published data with a CETO flag. The use of the CETO flag shall be dependent on the individual Member State’s share of the EU total of value added in the business economy as follows:
(a)
Germany, France, Italy, and United Kingdom: CETO-flagged data may be sent for NACE Rev. 2 class level and for the size class breakdown at NACE Rev. 2 group level. No more than 15 % of the cells may be marked.
(b)
Belgium, Denmark, Ireland, Greece, Spain, the Netherlands, Austria, Poland, Portugal, Finland and Sweden: CETO-flagged data may be sent for NACE Rev. 2 class level and for the size class breakdown at NACE Rev. 2 group level. No more than 25 % of the cells may be marked. In addition, if, in any of these Member States, the share of a NACE Rev. 2 class or of a size class of NACE Rev. 2 group is less than 0,1 % of the business economy of the Member State concerned, those data may additionally be sent as CETO-flagged.
(c)
Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Estonia, Cyprus, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Hungary, Malta, Romania, Slovenia and Slovakia: CETO-flagged data may be sent for NACE Rev. 2 group and class level and for the size class breakdown at NACE Rev. 2 group level. No more than 25 % of the cells at group level may be marked.
The measures designed to amend non-essential elements of this Regulation, inter alia, by supplementing it, relating to reviewing the rules for the CETO flag and grouping the Member States, shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 12(3) by 29 April 2013 and every five years thereafter.
