Article 3
Modules
1.   The statistics to be compiled for the areas referred to in Article 1 shall be grouped as modules.
2.   The modules in this Regulation shall be:
(a)
a common module for annual structural statistics, as defined in Annex I;
(b)
a detailed module for structural statistics in industry, as defined in Annex II;
(c)
a detailed module for structural statistics in trade, as defined in Annex III;
(d)
a detailed module for structural statistics in construction, as defined in Annex IV;
(e)
a detailed module for structural statistics in insurance, as defined in Annex V;
(f)
a detailed module for structural statistics on credit institutions, as defined in Annex VI;
(g)
a detailed module for structural statistics on pension funds, as defined in Annex VII;
(h)
a detailed module for structural statistics on business services, as defined in Annex VIII;
(i)
a detailed module for structural statistics on business demography, as defined in Annex IX;
(j)
a flexible module for the conduct of a specific and limited ad hoc data collection of enterprise characteristics.
3.   The following information shall be laid down in each module:
(a)
the activities for which the statistics are to be compiled, drawn from the coverage indicated in Article 2(1);
(b)
the types of statistical unit to be used for the compilation of the statistics, drawn from the list of statistical units referred to in Article 2(2);
(c)
lists of characteristics for which statistics are to be compiled for the areas referred to in Article 1 and the reference periods for those characteristics;
(d)
the frequency of the compilation of the statistics, which shall be annual or multiannual. If multiannual, compilation shall take place at least once every 10 years;
(e)
the timetable showing the first reference years for the statistics to be compiled;
(f)
the standards relating to representativeness and quality evaluation;
(g)
the period of time starting from the end of the reference period within which the statistics are to be transmitted;
(h)
the maximum length of the transitional period which may be conceded.
4.   The use of the flexible module referred to in paragraph 2(j) shall be planned in close cooperation with Member States. Its scope, list of characteristics, reference period, activities to be covered and quality requirements shall be decided by the Commission in accordance with the regulatory procedure referred to in Article 12(2) at least 12 months before the beginning of the reference period. The Commission shall also specify the need for the information and the impact of the data collection in respect of the burden on businesses and the costs to the Member States.
In order to limit the burden on businesses and the costs to the Member States, the size of the data collection shall be restricted to a maximum of 20 enterprise characteristics or questions, to a maximum of 25 000 respondent enterprises across the European Union, and to a maximum average individual respondent input of 1,5 hours. Ad hoc data collection shall include a representative number of Member States. When only results at European level are needed, the Commission may set up a European sampling approach to ensure a minimum burden and minimum costs.
The costs of ad hoc data collection may be co-financed by the Commission using established procedures.
