Article 5
Scope of support
1.   Within its objectives and in accordance with the implementation measures listed in Annex II, the Fund shall, in particular, support actions such as those listed in Annex III.
2.   To achieve its objectives, the Fund may support, in line with Union priorities and subject to appropriate safeguards, actions as referred to in Annex III in and in relation to third countries, where appropriate, in accordance with Article 19.
3.   As regards actions in and in relation to third countries, the Commission and the Member States, together with the European External Action Service, shall, in accordance with their respective responsibilities, ensure coordination with relevant Union policies, strategies and instruments. They shall, in particular, ensure that actions in and in relation to third countries:
(a)
are carried out in synergy and in coherence with other actions outside the Union supported through other Union instruments;
(b)
are coherent with external Union policy, respect the principle of policy coherence for development and are consistent with the strategic programming documents for the region or country in question;
(c)
focus on measures that are not development-oriented; and
(d)
serve the interests of internal Union policies and are consistent with activities undertaken within the Union.
4.   Equipment and ICT systems financed under the Fund may be used in the complementary area covered by Regulation (EU) 2021/1148. Such equipment and ICT systems shall remain available and deployable for the objectives of the Fund.
The use of equipment in the complementary area referred to in the first subparagraph shall not exceed 30 % of the total period of use of that equipment.
ICT systems used in the complementary area referred to in the first subparagraph shall provide data and services for the prevention, detection and investigation of criminal offences.
Member States shall inform the Commission in their annual performance reports of any such additional use and the place of deployment of equipment and ICT systems.
5.   The following shall not be eligible:
(a)
actions limited to the maintenance of public order at national level;
(b)
actions with a military or defence purpose;
(c)
equipment of which the primary purpose is customs control;
(d)
coercive equipment, including weapons, ammunition, explosives and riot batons, except for training purposes;
(e)
informant rewards and flash money outside the framework of an EU policy cycle/EMPACT operational action.
By way of derogation from the first subparagraph, where an emergency situation occurs, actions as referred to in point (a) of the first subparagraph may be considered eligible.
