Article 13
Member States’ programmes
1.   Each Member State shall ensure that the priorities addressed in its programmes are consistent with and respond to Union priorities and challenges in the area of security and are fully in accordance with the relevant Union acquis and agreed Union priorities. In defining the priorities of their programmes, Member States shall ensure that the implementation measures listed in in Annex II are adequately addressed in their programmes.
The Commission shall assess the Member States’ programmes in accordance with Article 23 of Regulation (EU) 2021/1060.
2.   For the purposes of paragraph 1, and without prejudice to paragraph 3 of this Article, each Member State shall allocate:
(a)
a minimum of 10 % of the resources allocated under Article 10(1) to the specific objective set out in point (a) of Article 3(2); and
(b)
a minimum of 10 % of the resources allocated under Article 10(1) to the specific objective set out in point (b) of Article 3(2).
3.   A Member State may allocate less than the minimum percentages referred to in paragraph 2 only if it provides a detailed explanation in its programme as to why allocating resources below that level would not jeopardise the achievement of the relevant objective.
4.   The Commission shall ensure that the knowledge and expertise of the relevant decentralised agencies are taken into account, at an early stage and in a timely manner, in the development of the Member States’ programmes.
5.   In order to avoid overlaps, Member States shall consult the relevant Union bodies, offices and agencies on the design of their actions, in particular when implementing EU policy cycle/EMPACT operational actions or actions coordinated by the Joint Cybercrime Action Taskforce (J-CAT), and on the design of training activities.
6.   The Commission may involve, where appropriate, relevant decentralised agencies in the monitoring and evaluation tasks specified in Section 5, in particular with a view to ensuring that the actions implemented with the support of the Fund are compliant with the relevant Union acquis and agreed Union priorities.
7.   A maximum of 35 % of the allocation of a Member State’s programme may be used for the purchase of equipment, means of transport or the construction of security-relevant facilities. This ceiling may be exceeded only in duly justified cases.
8.   In their programmes, Member States shall give priority to addressing:
(a)
agreed Union priorities and the acquis in the area of security, in particular the efficient exchange of relevant and accurate information and the implementation of the components of the framework for interoperability of EU information systems;
(b)
recommendations with financial implications made within the framework of Regulation (EU) No 1053/2013 and falling within the scope of this Regulation;
(c)
country-specific deficiencies with financial implications identified in the framework of needs assessments such as European Semester recommendations in the area of corruption.
9.   Where necessary, the programme of the Member State in question shall be amended in accordance with Article 24 of Regulation (EU) 2021/1060 to take into account the recommendations referred to in point (b) of paragraph 8 of this Article.
10.   Member States shall in particular pursue the actions listed in Annex IV in their programmes. To address unforeseen or new circumstances and to ensure the effective implementation of funding, the Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 32 to amend Annex IV.
11.   Whenever a Member State decides to implement a project supported by the Fund with, in or in relation to a third country, the Member State concerned shall consult the Commission prior to the approval of the project.
12.   Programming as referred to in Article 22(5) of Regulation (EU) 2021/1060 shall be based on the types of intervention set out in Table 2 of Annex VI to this Regulation and shall include an indicative breakdown of the programmed resources by type of intervention within each specific objective set out in Article 3(2) of this Regulation.
