Article 18
Report
1.   By 1 January 2020 and at appropriate intervals thereafter, Member States shall prepare, provide to the Commission and make publicly available on the internet a report with the following:
(a)
information concerning the implementation of this Regulation;
(b)
information needed for the fulfilment by the Union of its reporting obligation under Article 21 of the Convention;
(c)
a summary of the information gathered in accordance with Article 12 of this Regulation;
(d)
information regarding mercury located in their territories:
(i)
a list of sites where stocks of more than 50 metric tonnes of mercury other than mercury waste are located as well as the amount of mercury at each site;
(ii)
a list of sites where more than 50 metric tonnes of mercury waste is accumulated as well as the amount of mercury waste at each site; and
(e)
a list of sources supplying more than 10 metric tonnes of mercury per year, where Member States are made aware of such sources.
Member States may decide not to make any of the information referred to in the first subparagraph publicly available on any of the grounds mentioned in Article 4(1) and (2) of Directive 2003/4/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (17), subject to the second subparagraph of Article 4(2) of that Directive.
2.   For the purposes of the report referred to in paragraph 1, the Commission shall make an electronic reporting tool available to the Member States.
The Commission shall adopt implementing acts to establish appropriate questionnaires in order to specify the content, the information and the key performance indicators needed to meet the requirements under paragraph 1 as well as the format and the frequency of the report referred to in paragraph 1. Those questionnaires shall not duplicate reporting obligations of the Parties to the Convention. The implementing acts referred to in this paragraph shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 22(2).
3.   The Member States shall, without delay, make available to the Commission reports they provide to the Secretariat of the Convention.
