Article 5
Global resources and implementation
1.   The global resources for the implementation of the Instrument shall be EUR 1 004 million in current prices.
2.   Annual appropriations shall be authorised by the European Parliament and the Council within the limits of the multiannual financial framework.
3.   The global resources shall be implemented through the following means:
(a)
national programmes, in accordance with Article 7;
(b)
Union actions, in accordance with Article 8;
(c)
technical assistance, in accordance with Article 9;
(d)
emergency assistance, in accordance with Article 10.
4.   The budget allocated under the Instrument to Union actions referred to in Article 8 of this Regulation, to the technical assistance referred to in Article 9 of this Regulation and to the emergency assistance referred to in Article 10 of this Regulation shall be implemented under direct management and indirect management in accordance, respectively, with points (a) and (c) of Article 58(1) of Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council (23).
The budget allocated to the national programmes referred to in Article 7 of this Regulation shall be implemented under shared management in accordance with point (b) of Article 58(1) of Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012.
5.   Without prejudice to the prerogatives of the European Parliament and the Council, the global resources shall be used as follows:
(a)
EUR 662 million for the national programmes of Member States;
(b)
EUR 342 million for Union actions, emergency assistance and technical assistance at the initiative of the Commission.
6.   Each Member State shall allocate the amounts for national programmes indicated in Annex III as follows:
(a)
at least 20 % for actions relating to the specific objective referred to in point (a) of the first subparagraph of Article 3(2); and
(b)
at least 10 % for actions relating to the specific objective referred to in point (b) of the first subparagraph of Article 3(2).
Member States may depart from those minimum percentages provided that an explanation is included in the national programmes as to why allocating resources below that level does not jeopardise the achievement of the relevant objective. That explanation will be assessed by the Commission in the context of its approval of national programmes as referred to in Article 7(2).
7.   Jointly with the global resources established for Regulation (EU) No 515/2014, the global resources available for the Instrument, as established in paragraph 1 of this Article, constitute the financial envelope for the Fund and serve as the prime reference, within the meaning of point 17 of the Interinstitutional Agreement between the European Parliament, the Council and the Commission on budgetary discipline, on cooperation in budgetary matters and on sound financial management, for the European Parliament and the Council during the annual budgetary procedure.
