Article 4
General obligations of Member States
1.   Subject to the dates of phases of application set out in Annex III to this Regulation and without prejudice to Article 23 of Directive 2007/46/EC, Member States shall refuse, on grounds relating to the permissible sound level, to grant EU type-approval in respect of a type of motor vehicle which does not comply with the requirements of this Regulation.
2.   From 1 July 2016, Member States shall refuse, on grounds relating to the permissible sound level, to grant EU type-approval in respect of a type of replacement silencing system, or components thereof, as a separate technical unit which does not comply with the requirements of this Regulation.
Member States shall continue to grant EU type-approval, under the terms of Directive 70/157/EEC, to a replacement silencing system, or components thereof, as a separate technical unit intended for vehicles type-approved before the dates of phases of application set out in Annex III to this Regulation.
3.   Subject to the dates of phases of application set out in Annex III to this Regulation, Member States shall, on grounds relating to the permissible sound level, consider certificates of conformity for new vehicles to be no longer valid for the purposes of Article 26 of Directive 2007/46/EC, and shall prohibit the registration, sale and entry into service of such vehicles where such vehicles do not comply with this Regulation.
4.   Member States shall permit, on grounds relating to the permissible sound level, the sale and entry into service of a replacement silencing system, or components thereof, as a separate technical unit, if it conforms to a type in respect of which a EU type-approval has been granted in accordance with this Regulation.
Member States shall permit the sale and entry into service of replacement silencing systems, or components thereof, holding an EU type-approval as a separate technical unit under the terms of Directive 70/157/EEC intended for vehicles type-approved before the dates of phases of application set out in Annex III to this Regulation.
