Article 76
Inspection report
1.   Officials shall draw up an inspection report after each inspection and shall forward it to their competent authorities. Data contained in this report shall be recorded and transmitted by electronic means. In the case of an inspection of a fishing vessel flying the flag of another Member State, a copy of the inspection report shall be sent by electronic means and without delay to the flag Member State.
In the case of an inspection of a fishing vessel flying the flag of a third country, a copy of the inspection report shall be sent by electronic means and without delay to the competent authorities of the third country concerned. In the case where a serious infringement is detected, a copy of the inspection report shall also be sent to the Commission.
In the case of an inspection carried out in the waters or ports under the jurisdiction of a Member State other than the inspecting Member State, in accordance with this Regulation, or in the waters or ports of a third country in accordance with international agreements, a copy of the inspection report shall be sent by electronic means and without delay to that Member State or that third country.
2.   Officials shall communicate their findings from the inspection to the operator or to the master, who shall have the possibility to comment on the inspection and its findings. Those comments shall be reflected in the inspection report. Officials shall indicate in the fishing logbook that an inspection has been made.
3.   A copy of the inspection report shall be sent as soon as possible to the operator or to the master, and in any case no later than 15 working days after the completion of the inspection.
4.   The Commission may, by means of implementing acts, lay down detailed rules on the minimum format and content of inspection reports, on the completion and transmission of inspection reports. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 119(2).
