Article 91
Immediate enforcement measures for serious infringements
1.   Where any relevant data or information leads competent authorities of Member States to believe that a natural person has committed or a legal person is liable for a serious infringement, or where a natural person is caught in the act of committing a serious infringement, Member States shall immediately, in addition to the investigation of the infringement in accordance with the provisions of Article 85, in conformity with their national law, take relevant and immediate measures such as:
(a)
ordering the cessation of fishing activities;
(b)
the rerouting of the fishing vessel to a port;
(c)
the rerouting of the transport vehicle to another location for inspection;
(d)
the ordering of a bond;
(e)
the seizure of the fishing vessel, transport vehicle, fishing gear, catches or fishery products or the profit earned from the sale of the catches or fishery products;
(f)
restriction to or prohibition of the placing on the market of fishery products;
(g)
the temporary immobilisation of the fishing vessel or transport vehicle concerned;
(h)
the suspension of the authorisation to fish;
(i)
ordering the temporary cessation of business activities.
2.   The immediate measures referred to in paragraph 1 shall be of such nature as to prevent the continuation of the detected serious infringement concerned, to enable all the necessary action to be taken for ensuring safekeeping of the evidence pertaining to such infringement and to allow the competent authorities to complete their investigation.
3.   The Member State concerned shall immediately, and in conformity with its national law, notify the flag State of the measures referred to in paragraph 1.
Article 91a
Sanctions for serious infringements
1.   Without prejudice to other sanctions applied in accordance with this Regulation and national law, Member States shall ensure that a serious infringement which has led to obtaining fishery or aquaculture products shall be punishable by administrative financial penalties, the minimum of which shall be at least the value of the fishery or aquaculture products obtained as a result of committing the serious infringement, and the maximum of which shall be at least five times the value of the fishery or aquaculture products obtained as a result of committing the serious infringement.
2.   In the case of a repeated serious infringement within a three-year period which has led to obtaining fishery or aquaculture products, Member States shall ensure that the serious infringement is punishable by administrative financial penalties, the minimum of which shall be at least twice the value of the fishery or aquaculture products obtained as a result of committing the serious infringement, and the maximum of which shall be at least eight times the value of the fishery or aquaculture products obtained as a result of committing the serious infringement.
3.   Notwithstanding paragraphs 1 and 2, Member States may in their national legal system establish standard rates for administrative financial penalties instead of minimum administrative penalties.
The minimum standard rates shall not be lower than the average value of fishery or aquaculture products obtained as a result of committing a serious infringement. In the event of a repeated serious infringement as referred to in paragraph 2, the minimum standard rates shall not be lower than twice that average value.
Member States establishing such standard rates may allow courts or competent authorities to deviate from those standard rates where necessary for the sanctions to be effective, proportionate and dissuasive, and to impose administrative financial penalties up to a maximum which shall be at least five times the value of the fishery or aquaculture products obtained as a result of committing the serious infringement, or, in the case of a repeated serious infringement as referred to in paragraph 2, at least eight times that value.
4.   The minimum level or the standard rate of administrative financial penalties established in paragraphs 1, 2 and 3, is without prejudice to the application of any rules concerning mitigating circumstances and other factors, provided for under national law, when deciding on the sanctions to be applied in each individual case.
5.   When calculating the value of the fishery or aquaculture products obtained as a result of committing the serious infringement, Member States shall consider national prices at first sale, prices identified on principal international markets relevant for the species and fishing area concerned or the prices of the European Market Observatory for Fisheries and Aquaculture Products (EUMOFA) platform, at the time when the infringement was committed.
6.   Where the serious infringement did not lead to obtaining fishery or aquaculture products, the administrative financial penalties shall be determined by the Member States in accordance with Article 89a, at a level ensuring that these are effective, proportionate and dissuasive.
7.   Member States may also, or alternatively, use effective, proportionate and dissuasive criminal sanctions while ensuring that those sanctions have an equivalent effect to the administrative financial penalties referred to in this Article.
Article 91b
Accompanying sanctions
1.   The sanctions provided for in Articles 89, 89a and 91a may be accompanied by other sanctions, in particular:
(a)
the immobilisation of the fishing vessel(s) or vehicle(s) involved in the infringement;
(b)
the confiscation of the vessel(s), vehicle(s), prohibited fishing gear, catches or fishery products;
(c)
the suspension or withdrawal of the fishing licence or fishing authorisation;
(d)
the reduction or withdrawal of fishing rights;
(e)
the exclusion from the right to obtain new fishing rights;
(f)
the ban on access to public assistance or subsidies;
(g)
the suspension or withdrawal of the status of approved economic operator granted pursuant to Article 16(3) of Regulation (EC) No 1005/2008;
(h)
the removal of the fishing vessel from the national register;
(i)
the suspension or cessation of all or part of the economic activities of the operator related to the common fisheries policy;
(j)
the suspension or withdrawal of the authorisation to engage in trading activities concerning fishery and aquaculture products.
2.   Member States shall determine, in accordance with their national law, the duration of the sanctions referred to in paragraph 1.
3.   When a vessel is subject to immobilisation under of paragraph 1, point (a), decided by its flag Member State or has its fishing authorisation suspended or withdrawn in accordance with paragraph 1, point (c), the flag Member State shall suspend its fishing licence for the same duration or withdraw it.
