Article 79
Union inspectors
1.   Member States and Commission shall notify a list of officials to EFCA to be included in the list of Union inspectors. EFCA shall keep and update the list of Union inspectors, including officials of Member States, Commission officials and officials of EFCA. EFCA shall make that list available to the Commission and to the Member States.
2.   Without prejudice to the primary responsibility of coastal Member States, Union inspectors may carry out inspections in accordance with this Regulation on the territory of Member States and in Union waters, and on Union fishing vessels outside Union waters. In the case of an inspection on the territory of a Member State, Union inspectors not appointed by that Member State may only carry out such inspections in the presence of an official appointed by that Member State in charge of the inspection, or with the agreement of that Member State.
3.   Union inspectors may be assigned for:
(a)
the implementation of the specific control and inspection programmes adopted in accordance with Article 95;
(b)
international fisheries control programmes, where the Union is under an obligation to provide for control.
4.   Union inspectors may assist in training activities related to control and inspection, including training activities involving third-country officials.
5.   For the accomplishment of their tasks and subject to paragraph 6, Union inspectors shall, to the same extent and under the same conditions as officials of the Member State in which the inspection takes place, have access without delay to:
(a)
all areas on board Union fishing vessels and any other vessels carrying out fishing activities, public premises or places and means of transport; and
(b)
all relevant information and documents which are needed to fulfil their tasks, in particular fishing logbooks, fishing licences, certification of engine power, data from REM systems, landing declarations, catch certificates, transhipment declarations and sales notes.
6.   Union inspectors shall have no police and enforcement powers beyond the territory of their Member State of origin, or outside the Union waters under the sovereignty and jurisdiction of their Member State of origin.
7.   When assigned as Union inspectors, officials of the Commission or of EFCA shall have no police and enforcement powers.
8.   The Commission shall, by means of implementing acts, lay down detailed rules concerning:
(a)
the notification of Union inspectors to EFCA;
(b)
the adoption and maintenance of the list of Union inspectors;
(c)
the notification of Union inspectors to regional fisheries management organisations;
(d)
the powers and duties of Union inspectors;
(e)
the reports of Union inspectors;
(f)
the follow-up of reports of Union inspectors.
Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 119(2).’.
(67)
In Article 80, paragraph 4 is replaced as follows:
‘4.   A Member State may inspect Union fishing vessels flying its own flag or the flag of another Member State in waters or ports of third countries in accordance with international agreements.’.
(68)
In Title VII, the heading of Chapter III is replaced by the following:

                                       ‘
                                       Procedures in the event of an infringement
                                       ’.
(69)
Article 82 is replaced by the following:
‘Article 82
Duties of officials in the event of an infringement
1.   If the information collected during an inspection or any other relevant data or information leads the official to believe that an infringement of the rules of the common fisheries policy has been committed, the official shall:
(a)
note the detected infringement in the inspection report;
(b)
take all necessary actions to ensure safekeeping of the evidence pertaining to such detected infringement;
(c)
immediately forward the inspection report to the competent authority;
(d)
inform the natural or legal person suspected of having committed the infringement, or that was caught in the act of committing the infringement, that the infringement may result in sanctions being imposed and an appropriate number of points being assigned in accordance with Article 92. That shall be noted in the inspection report.
2.   Officials may remain on board a fishing vessel until the necessary steps have been taken in relation to the investigation as referred to in Article 85. The same shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to inspections carried out on any premises where fishery or aquaculture products are landed, stored, processed or marketed, as well as to inspections during the transport of those products. Where the inspection is carried out in respect of a vehicle used for transporting fishery or aquaculture products, the vehicle shall not be authorised to continue until the necessary steps have been taken in relation to the investigation as referred to in Article 85.’.
(70)
Article 84 is deleted.
(71)
In title VII, the following words are deleted:

                                       ‘
                                       Chapter IV


Proceedings of infringements detected in the course of inspections
                                       ’.
(72)
Articles 85 and 86 are replaced by the following:
‘Article 85
Proceedings
1.   Without prejudice to Article 72, Article 83(2) and Article 86, the competent authorities of the Member States shall take appropriate measures in accordance with Title VIII and immediately proceed with the investigation where any infringement is detected in the course of an inspection carried out by their officials, officials of other Member States, Union inspectors or officials of third countries, or where any relevant data or information leads the competent authorities of Member States to believe that an infringement of the rules of the common fisheries policy has been committed.
2.   In the case of a serious infringement, Member States shall take appropriate immediate measures in accordance with Article 91.
