Article 74
Conduct of inspections
1.   Member States shall set up and keep up to date a list of officials responsible for carrying out inspections.
2.   Officials shall carry out their duties in accordance with Union law. They shall prepare and conduct inspections in a non-discriminatory manner at sea, along the shoreline, in ports and at landing sites, during transport, on processing premises and along the supply chain of the fishery products.
3.   Officials shall verify compliance of the activities carried out by the operators and the masters with the rules of the common fisheries policy, and in particular:
(a)
the legality of the fishery products kept on board, stored, transported, transhipped, transferred, landed, processed or marketed and the accuracy of the documentation or electronic transmissions relating to them;
(b)
the legality of fishing gear used for the targeted and by-catch species, for the catches kept on board, and the compliance with other applicable technical measures for the conservation of fishery resources and the protection of marine ecosystems;
(c)
the presence on board of equipment for the retrieval of the fishing gear as referred to in Article 48;
(d)
if applicable, the stowage plan and the separate stowage of species;
(e)
the markings and identification of the vessels and gear;
(f)
the information on the engine referred to in Article 40;
(g)
the use and functioning of REM systems and other electronic monitoring devices, if applicable;
(h)
compliance with the rules concerning control observers, if applicable.
4.   Officials may examine all relevant areas, decks and rooms. They may also examine catches, whether processed or not, any fishing gear, equipment, containers and packages containing fish or fishery products and any relevant documents or electronic transmissions which they deem necessary to verify compliance with the rules of the common fisheries policy. They may question persons deemed to have information on the matter that is the subject of the inspection.
5.   Officials shall receive the training necessary to perform their tasks.
6.   Officials shall conduct inspections in such manner as to cause the least disturbance or inconvenience to the vessel or transport vehicle and its activities, and to the storing, processing and marketing of the catch. They shall, as far as possible, prevent any degradation of the catch during the inspection.
7.   The competent authorities of the Member States shall have procedures in place to ensure that any complaint regarding the conduct of inspections is properly investigated.
8.   If an official carrying out an inspection has reason to believe that a fishing vessel is engaged in fishing activities with the use of forced labour, as defined in Article 2 of the International Labour Organization (ILO) Convention No 29 on Forced Labour, that official shall notify any other relevant authorities of that Member State.
9.   Coastal Member States may, subject to appropriate arrangements with the flag Member State, invite officials of the competent authorities of that Member State to participate in inspections of fishing vessels flying the flag of that Member State, whilst those vessels are operating in waters of the coastal Member State or landing in its ports or at its landing sites.
10.   Member States shall adopt a risk-based approach for the selection of targets for inspection. For fisheries subject to specific control and inspection programmes referred to in Article 95, that approach shall be established in accordance with the harmonised methodology established by the Member States in cooperation with EFCA.
11.   The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 119a supplementing this Regulation by laying down specific rules on the conduct of inspections. Those rules may concern:
(a)
the authorisation and minimum standards for the qualification of the officials responsible for conducting inspections at sea or on land;
(b)
the coordination of control, inspection and enforcement activities between Member States;
(c)
the duties of officials authorised to conduct inspections;
(d)
the conduct of inspections at sea and on land.
