Article 86
Transfer of proceedings
1.   The Member State in the territory or waters of which an infringement has been detected may transfer proceedings relating to that infringement to the competent authorities of the flag Member State or the Member State of which the person suspected of having committed an infringement is a national, in agreement with the Member State concerned and on the condition that the transfer is more likely to achieve the result referred to in Article 89a(2).
2.   The flag Member State may transfer proceedings relating to an infringement to the competent authorities of the Member State which has detected that infringement, in agreement with the Member State concerned and on the condition that the transfer is more likely to achieve the result referred to in Article 89a(2).’.
(73)
Article 87 is deleted.
(74)
Article 88 is replaced by the following:
‘Article 88
Corrective measures in the absence of proceedings by the Member State of landing or transhipment
1.   If the Member State of landing or transhipment is not the flag Member State and its competent authorities do not take appropriate measures against the natural or legal persons responsible, or do not transfer proceedings in accordance with Article 86, the quantities of fish caught, discarded, landed or transhipped in breach of the rules of the common fisheries policy may be counted against the quota allocated to the Member State of landing or transhipment.
2.   The Commission shall, by means of implementing acts, decide on the quantities of fish to be counted against the quota of the Member State of landing or transhipment after the Commission has consulted the Member States concerned.
3.   If the Member State of landing or transhipment no longer has a corresponding quota at its disposal, Article 37 shall apply. To that end the quantities of fish caught, discarded, landed, or transhipped in breach of the rules of the common fisheries policy shall be deemed equivalent to the amount of the prejudice suffered, as referred to in that Article, by the flag Member State.’.
(75)
Title VIII is replaced by the following:

                                       ‘
                                       TITLE VIII


ENFORCEMENT

