Article 89
Measures and sanctions to ensure compliance
1.   In conformity with their national law and with the provisions of this Regulation, Member States shall lay down rules on measures and sanctions against the natural person having committed or a legal person held liable for a breach of the rules of the common fisheries policy, and shall systematically:
(a)
initiate proceedings in accordance with Article 85;
(b)
take appropriate measures when an infringement is detected; and
(c)
apply sanctions under this Title against the natural or legal persons having committed or held liable for a breach of the rules of the common fisheries policy.
2.   The competent authorities of the Member State having jurisdiction in the event of an infringement shall, without delay and in compliance with their national law, notify the flag Member State, the Member State of which the offender is a national, or any other Member State relevant for the administrative or criminal proceedings, of such proceedings or other measures taken under this Title.
3.   Member States shall, by 10 April 2026, notify national provisions referred to in paragraph 1 to the Commission and shall notify it without delay of any subsequent amendment thereof.
Article 89a
Sanctions
1.   Member States shall ensure that a natural person having committed, or a legal person held liable for, infringements of the rules of common fisheries policy is subject to effective, proportionate and dissuasive administrative sanctions. Member States may also, or alternatively, use effective, proportionate and dissuasive criminal sanctions.
2.   Member States shall ensure that the overall level of sanctions and accompanying sanctions applied in accordance with this Regulation and the relevant provisions of national law is proportionate to the seriousness of infringements and adequate in severity to effectively discourage further infringements and deprive those responsible of the economic benefit derived or expected from the infringement, without prejudice to the legitimate right to exercise their profession. For that purpose, account shall be taken of immediate enforcement measures taken pursuant to Article 91.
3.   When determining these sanctions the Member States shall take into account, in particular, the gravity, nature and extent of the infringement, including the prejudice or the level of the damage to the fishing resources and the marine environment concerned, its duration or repetition, and the accumulation of simultaneous infringements. Member States may also take into account the economic situation of the offender to ensure the dissuasiveness of these sanctions.
4.   Member States may apply a system whereby a financial penalty is proportionate to the turnover of the legal person, or to the economic benefit derived or expected from the infringement.
