Article 92
Point system for serious infringements
1.   Member States shall apply a point system for serious infringements referred to in Article 90, except for serious infringements which are not applicable to the holder of the fishing licence or the master.
2.   When a natural person has committed, or a legal person is held liable for, a serious infringement, a number of points calculated in accordance with Annex III shall be assigned to the holder of the fishing licence for the fishing vessel concerned.
3.   The points assigned shall be transferred to any future holder of the fishing licence for the catching vessel concerned where the vessel or the licence is sold, transferred or otherwise changes ownership after the date of the infringement, including to another Member State.
4.   Member States shall also establish a point system under which the master of a vessel is assigned the same number of points as the holder of the fishing licence as a result of a serious infringement related to the vessel and committed during the period of his or her command, in accordance with Annex III. Where the master of the vessel is not a national of the flag Member State, the flag Member State shall notify the number of points assigned to the master to the Member State of which the master is a national, or, in the case of nationals of third countries, to any State concerned.
5.   When two or more serious infringements by the same natural or legal person holding the fishing licence or by the master are detected in the course of one inspection, points in respect of each serious infringement concerned shall be assigned in accordance with paragraph 2, up to a maximum of 12 points for all those infringements.
6.   When the total number of points equals or exceeds 18 points, the fishing licence and/or the right to command a fishing vessel as a master shall be automatically suspended for a period of at least two months. That period shall be: four months if the suspension occurs a second time and the points equals or exceeds 36 points; eight months if the suspension occurs a third time and the number of points equals or exceeds 54 points; and one year if the suspension occurs a fourth time and the number of points equals or exceeds 72 points. In the event that the suspension occurs a fifth time and the number of points equals or exceeds 90 points, the fishing licence and the right to command a fishing vessel as a master shall be withdrawn, and the fishing vessel shall not be used for commercial exploitation of marine biological resources.
7.   Member States shall ensure that a natural person for which the suspension or withdrawal of the right to command a fishing vessel has been triggered pursuant to paragraph 6 is not allowed to operate as a master on board a fishing vessel flying their flag. In the event of the suspension of the right to command, this paragraph shall apply only for the period of the suspension.
8.   If the holder of a fishing licence or the master does not commit a serious infringement within three years from the date of committing the last serious confirmed infringement, all points shall be deleted.
9.   When a Member State other than the flag Member State has confirmed, under its national law, that a serious infringement has been committed within its jurisdiction, it shall notify it to the flag Member State in order for the latter to determine and to assign the number of points in accordance with Annex III.
10.   Member States shall designate the competent national authorities responsible for setting up the system for the assignment of points for serious infringements, assigning the appropriate number of points to the holder of a fishing licence and to the master and transferring the points in accordance with paragraph 3.
11.   Member States shall ensure that the application of national proceedings does not render the point system ineffective.
12.   The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 119a supplementing this Regulation by laying down rules on:
(a)
the follow-up of suspension and permanent withdrawal of a fishing licence or of a right from exercising fishing activity as a master;
(b)
measures to be taken in the event of illegal fishing activities during the suspension period or after the permanent withdrawal of a fishing licence or of a right to carry out fishing activities as a master;
(c)
conditions justifying the deletion of points;
(d)
the registration of masters authorised to carry out fishing activities and the recording of points assigned to masters.
13.   The Commission shall, by means of implementing acts, lay down detailed rules concerning:
(a)
the notifications of decisions on assignment of points;
(b)
the transfer of the points in accordance with paragraph 3;
(c)
the deletion from relevant lists of fishing licences or of the right to command a fishing vessel as a master, for the person responsible for serious infringements;
(d)
the obligation to provide information on the point system for masters of fishing vessels established by the Member States.
Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 119(2).
Article 92a
Liability of legal persons
1.   Legal persons shall be held liable for serious infringements where such infringements have been committed for their benefit by any natural person, acting either individually or as part of an organ of the legal person, and having a determining position within the legal person concerned based on any of the following:
(a)
a power of representation of the legal person;
(b)
an authority to take decisions on behalf of the legal person; or
(c)
an authority to exercise control within the legal person.
2.   A legal person may be held liable where the lack of supervision or control, by a natural person referred to in paragraph 1, has made possible the commission of a serious infringement for the benefit of that legal person by a natural person under its authority.
3.   Liability of a legal person shall not exclude proceedings against natural persons who are perpetrators of, instigators of or accessories in the infringements concerned.
Article 92b
Obligation to notify a definitive ruling
1.   The competent authorities of the Member State having jurisdiction in respect of an infringement shall, without delay and in compliance with the applicable procedures under national law, notify the flag State, the State of which the natural person having committed the infringement is a national or where the legal person held liable for the infringement is established, and, where appropriate, the coastal State, port State or the State in which the processing takes place, of any definitive ruling related to such infringement.
In the event of serious infringements detected in Union waters or in Union ports in relation to fishing vessels flying the flag of third countries, the competent authorities of the Member State concerned shall also, without delay, notify the Commission of any definitive ruling related to such infringements.
2.   In the event of a notification by the Member State referred to in paragraph 1, the flag Member State shall assign the appropriate number of points to the holder of the fishing licence and to the master of the fishing vessel concerned.
