Article 19
Resources for resettlement and humanitarian admission
1.   Member States shall receive, in addition to their allocation under point (a) of Article 13(1), an amount of EUR 10 000 for each person admitted through resettlement.
2.   Member States shall receive, in addition to their allocation under point (a) of Article 13(1), an amount of EUR 6 000 for each person admitted through humanitarian admission.
3.   The amount referred to in paragraph 2 shall be increased to EUR 8 000 for each person admitted through humanitarian admission who belongs to one or more of the following vulnerable groups:
(a)
women and children at risk;
(b)
unaccompanied minors;
(c)
persons having medical needs that can be addressed only through humanitarian admission;
(d)
persons in need of humanitarian admission for legal or physical protection needs, including victims of violence or torture.
4.   Where a Member State admits a person belonging to more than one of the categories referred to in paragraphs 2 and 3, it shall receive the amount only once in respect of that person.
5.   Where appropriate, Member States may also be eligible to receive the respective amounts for family members of persons referred to in paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 if those family members are admitted to ensure family unity.
6.   The amounts referred to in this Article shall take the form of financing not linked to costs in accordance with Article 125 of the Financial Regulation.
7.   The amounts referred to in paragraphs 1, 2, 3 and 5 shall be allocated to the Member State’s programme for the first time in the financing decision approving that programme. Those amounts shall not be used for other actions in the Member State’s programme except in duly justified circumstances, as approved by the Commission through the amendment of that programme. Those amounts may be included in the payment applications to the Commission, provided that the person in respect of whom the amount is allocated was effectively resettled or admitted.
8.   For the purposes of control and audit, Member States shall retain the information necessary to allow the proper identification of the persons resettled or admitted and of the date of their resettlement or admission.
9.   To take account of current inflation rates, relevant developments in the field of resettlement, and other factors which might optimise the use of the financial incentive brought by the amounts referred to in paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of this Article, the Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 37 to adjust, if deemed appropriate, and within the limits of available resources, those amounts.
