Article 31
Emergency assistance
1.   The Fund shall provide financial assistance to address urgent and specific needs in the event of duly justified emergency situations resulting from one or more of the following cases:
(a)
an exceptional migratory situation characterised by a large or disproportionate influx of third-country nationals into one or more Member States which places significant and urgent demands on those Member States’ reception and detention facilities, and on their asylum and migration management systems and procedures;
(b)
an event of a mass influx of displaced persons within the meaning of Council Directive 2001/55/EC (38);
(c)
an exceptional migratory situation in a third country, including where persons in need of protection could be stranded due to political developments or conflicts, notably where it might have an impact on migration flows towards the Union.
In response to such duly justified emergency situations, the Commission may decide to provide emergency assistance, including for voluntary relocation, within the limits of available resources. In such cases, the Commission shall inform the European Parliament and the Council in a timely manner.
2.   Measures in third countries shall be implemented in accordance with Article 5(2) and (3).
3.   Emergency assistance may be allocated to Member States’ programmes in addition to the allocation under Article 13(1) and Annex I, provided that it is subsequently earmarked as such in the Member State’s programme. That funding shall not be used for other actions in the Member State’s programme except in duly justified circumstances and as approved by the Commission through the amendment of the Member State’s programme. Pre-financing for emergency assistance may amount to 95 % of the Union contribution, subject to the availability of funds.
4.   Grants implemented under direct management shall be awarded and managed in accordance with Title VIII of the Financial Regulation.
5.   Where necessary for the implementation of an action, emergency assistance may cover expenditure which was incurred prior to the date of submission of the grant application or the request for assistance for that action, provided that that expenditure was not incurred prior to 1 January 2021.
6.   On duly justified imperative grounds of urgency and to ensure that there is a timely availability of resources for emergency assistance, the Commission may separately adopt a financing decision, as referred to in Article 110 of the Financial Regulation, for emergency assistance by way of an immediately applicable implementing act in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 38(4). Such an act shall remain in force for a period not exceeding 18 months.
