Whereas:
(1)
In the context of the evolving migratory challenges characterised by the need to support strong reception, asylum, integration and migration systems in the Member States, to prevent and adequately handle situations of pressure in solidarity, and to replace irregular and unsafe arrivals with legal and safe pathways, investing in efficient and coordinated migration management in the Union is key to realising the Union’s objective of constituting an area of freedom, security and justice in accordance with Article 67(2) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU).
(2)
The importance of a coordinated approach by the Union and the Member States is reflected in the European Agenda on Migration of 13 May 2015, which stressed the need for a consistent and clear common policy in order to restore confidence in the Union’s ability to bring together European and national efforts to address migration and to work together in an effective way, in accordance with the principle of solidarity and fair sharing of responsibility between the Member States as set out in Article 80 TFEU; this was confirmed in the mid-term review of 27 September 2017 and the progress reports of 14 March 2018 and 16 May 2018.
(3)
In its conclusions of 19 October 2017, the European Council reaffirmed the need to pursue a comprehensive, pragmatic and resolute approach to migration management that aims to ensure control of external borders and reduce irregular arrivals and the number of deaths at sea; that approach should be based on the flexible and coordinated use of all available Union and Member State instruments. The European Council further called for the ensuring of significantly enhanced returns through actions at both Union and Member State level, such as effective readmission agreements and arrangements.
(4)
In order to support efforts to ensure a comprehensive approach to the management of migration that is grounded on mutual trust, solidarity and fair sharing of responsibility among Member States and Union institutions, with the objective of ensuring a common sustainable Union policy on asylum and immigration, Member States should be supported by adequate financial resources in the form of an Asylum, Migration and Integration Fund (the ‘Fund’).
(5)
All actions funded under the Fund, including those carried out in third countries, should be implemented in full compliance with the rights and principles enshrined in the Union acquis and the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union (the ‘Charter’), and should be in line with the international obligations of the Union and the Member States arising from the international instruments to which they are party, in particular by ensuring compliance with the principles of gender equality, non-discrimination and the best interests of the child.
(6)
The best interests of the child should be a primary consideration in all actions or decisions concerning children in migration, including returns, taking full account of the right of the child to express his or her views.
(7)
The Fund should build on the results achieved and investments made with the support of its predecessors: the European Refugee Fund established by Decision No 573/2007/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (4) for the period 2008-2013, the European Fund for the Integration of third-country nationals established by Council Decision 2007/435/EC (5) for the period 2007-2013, the European Return Fund established by Decision No 575/2007/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (6) for the period 2008-2013 and the Asylum, Migration and Integration Fund established by Regulation (EU) No 516/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council (7) for the period 2014-2020. It should at the same time take into account all relevant new developments.
(8)
The Fund should support solidarity and fair sharing of responsibility between Member States and the efficient management of migration flows, inter alia, by promoting common measures in the area of asylum, including Member States’ efforts in receiving persons in need of international protection through resettlement and humanitarian admission and the transfer between Member States of applicants for international protection or beneficiaries of international protection, by enhancing the protection of vulnerable asylum seekers such as children, by supporting integration strategies and by developing and strengthening legal migration policy, for example, through the provision of safe and legal avenues of entry to the Union, which should also help to ensure the Union’s long-term competitiveness and the future of its social model and reduce incentives for irregular migration through a sustainable return and readmission policy.
(9)
Given the internal nature of the Fund and that the Fund is the main funding instrument for asylum and migration at Union level, the Fund should primarily support actions serving internal Union policy on asylum and migration in line with the Fund’s objectives. However, given that certain actions taken outside the Union contribute to the achievement of the Fund’s objectives and, under certain circumstances, may bring Union added value, the Fund should support the strengthening of cooperation and partnership with third countries for the purpose of managing migration in order to reinforce avenues of legal migration and enhance effective, safe and dignified return and readmission, as well as to promote initial reintegration in third countries. Support provided under the Fund would be without prejudice to the current voluntary nature of resettlement and relocation of applicants for international protection and beneficiaries of international protection under the legal framework of the Common European Asylum System that applies at the time of adoption of this Regulation.
(10)
In order to benefit from the expertise of relevant decentralised agencies, the Commission should ensure that their knowledge and experience is taken into account as regards the areas of their competence in the development of Member States’ programmes. Furthermore, it should be possible for the Fund to complement the following activities supported by the European Asylum Support Office (EASO), established by Regulation (EU) No 439/2010 of the European Parliament and of the Council (8), with a view to facilitating and improving the functioning of the Common European Asylum System: strengthening practical cooperation, in particular information exchanges regarding asylum and good practices; promoting Union and international law and contributing to the uniform implementation of Union law on asylum on the basis of high standards for international protection procedures, for reception conditions and for the assessment of protection needs across the Union; enabling the sustainable and fair distribution of applications for international protection; facilitating convergence in the assessment of applications for international protection across the Union; supporting the resettlement efforts of the Member States; and providing operational and technical assistance to Member States for the management of their asylum and reception systems, in particular those whose systems are subject to disproportionate pressure.
(11)
The Fund should support the efforts of the Union and the Member States to enhance the Member States’ capacity to develop, monitor and evaluate their asylum policies in the light of their obligations under Union law.
(12)
The Fund should support the Member States’ and the Union’s efforts to fully implement and further develop the Common European Asylum System, including its external dimension.
(13)
Partnerships and cooperation with third countries are an essential component of Union policy for managing migration. The Fund should contribute to replacing unsafe and irregular arrival with legal and safe arrival in the territory of the Member States of third-country nationals or stateless persons in need of international protection, expressing solidarity with countries in regions to which or within which a large number of persons in need of international protection have been displaced by helping to alleviate the pressure on those countries, and should effectively contribute to global resettlement initiatives with the Union and Member States speaking with one voice in international fora and with third countries. The Fund should provide support, in the form of financial incentives, to efforts made by Member States to provide international protection and a durable solution for refugees and displaced persons who have been admitted under resettlement or humanitarian admission programmes.
(14)
Considering the migration flows to the Union and the importance of ensuring integration and inclusion for persons coming to Europe for local communities and for the long-term well-being of our societies and the stability of our economies, it is crucial to support Member States’ policies for the integration of legally-staying third-country nationals, including in the priority areas identified in the Action Plan on Integration and Inclusion 2021-2027. The Fund should support integration measures that are tailored to the needs of third-country nationals, as well as horizontal measures aimed at building Member States’ capacity to develop integration strategies, to strengthen exchange and cooperation, and to promote contact, constructive dialogue and acceptance between third-country nationals and the receiving society.
(15)
In order to increase efficiency, to achieve the greatest Union added value and to ensure the consistency of the Union’s response in terms of fostering the integration of third-country nationals, actions financed under the Fund should be consistent with and complementary to actions financed under other Union instruments, in particular external instruments, the European Social Fund Plus (ESF+), established by Regulation (EU) 2021/1057 of the European Parliament and of the Council (9), and the European Regional Development Fund (ERDF), established by Regulation (EU) 2021/1058 of the European Parliament and of the Council (10). The Fund should support measures tailored to the needs of third-country nationals that are generally implemented in the early stages of integration, as well as horizontal measures supporting Member States’ capacities in the field of integration, whereas interventions for third-country nationals with a longer-term impact should be financed under the ESF+ and ERDF. In this context, the authorities of the Member States responsible for the implementation of the Fund should be required to cooperate and coordinate with the authorities identified by Member States for the purpose of the management of the interventions of the ESF+ and the ERDF and, wherever necessary, to cooperate and coordinate with their managing authorities and with the managing authorities of other Union funds contributing to the integration of third-country nationals.
(16)
The scope of the integration measures should also cover beneficiaries of international protection in order to ensure a comprehensive approach to integration, taking into account the specificities of that target group. Where integration measures are combined with reception, actions should, where appropriate, also allow asylum seekers to be included.
(17)
The implementation of the Fund in the area of integration should be consistent with the Union’s common basic principles on integration, as specified in the Action Plan on Integration and Inclusion 2021-2027.
(18)
It should be possible for those Member States that so wish to provide in their programmes for integration measures to include immediate relatives of third-country nationals, thus supporting family unity, to the extent that doing so is necessary for the effective implementation of such measures. The term ‘immediate relative’ should be understood as meaning spouses, partners and any person having direct family links in the descending or ascending line with the third-country national targeted by the integration measure and who would not otherwise be covered by the scope of the Fund.
(19)
Considering the crucial role played by Member States’ authorities and civil society organisations in the field of integration, and in order to facilitate the access of those entities to funding at Union level, the Fund should facilitate the implementation of actions in the field of integration by national, regional and local authorities and civil society organisations, including through the use of the thematic facility and through a higher co-financing rate for those actions. In that regard, a minimum of 5 % of the initial allocation to the thematic facility should target the implementation of integration measures by local and regional authorities.
(20)
In addition to the co-financing rate provided by the Fund for projects, Member States are encouraged to provide funding from the budgets of their public authorities where such funding is essential for a project to be carried out, particularly when the project is implemented by a civil society organisation.
(21)
Considering the long-term economic and demographic challenges faced by the Union and the increasingly globalised nature of migration, it is crucial to establish well-functioning channels for legal migration to the Union in order to maintain the Union as an attractive destination for regular migration, in accordance with Member States’ economic and social needs, and to ensure the sustainability of welfare systems and growth of the Union economy, while protecting migrant workers from labour exploitation.
(22)
The Fund should support Member States in setting up strategies and strengthening and developing policies for legal migration, and in enhancing their capacity to develop, implement, monitor and evaluate immigration and integration strategies, policies and measures for legally staying third-country nationals, in particular Union legal instruments for legal migration. The Fund should also support the exchange of information, best practices and cooperation between different administrative departments and levels of government, and between Member States.
(23)
An efficient and dignified return policy is an integral part of the comprehensive migration approach pursued by the Union and its Member States. The Fund should support and encourage efforts by Member States with a view to the effective implementation and further development of common standards on return, in particular as set out in Directive 2008/115/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (11), with an emphasis on voluntary returns, and of an integrated and coordinated approach to return management. For sustainable return policies, the Fund should equally support related measures in third countries, such as measures to facilitate and guarantee safe and dignified return and readmission and sustainable reintegration of returnees, including through the provision of cash or in-kind support.
(24)
Member States should give preference to voluntary return and should ensure effective, safe and dignified return. In order to promote voluntary return, Member States should envisage incentives such as preferential treatment in the form of enhanced return assistance and initial reintegration support. That kind of voluntary return is in the interest of both returnees and authorities in terms of its cost-effectiveness.
(25)
While voluntary return should take priority over forced return, they are nevertheless interlinked, with a mutually reinforcing effect, and Member States should therefore be encouraged to reinforce the complementarities between those two forms of return. The possibility of removals is an important element that contributes to the integrity of the asylum and legal migration systems. The Fund should therefore support actions by Member States to facilitate and carry out removals in accordance with standards laid down in Union law, where applicable, and with full respect for the fundamental rights and dignity of returnees.
(26)
Specific support measures for returnees, with particular attention to their humanitarian and protection needs in the Member States and in the countries of return, can improve conditions of return and enhance the reintegration of returnees. Particular attention should be paid to vulnerable persons.
(27)
Effective readmission of illegally staying third-country nationals by third countries is an integral component of the Union return policy and a central tool for the efficient management of migration flows, as it facilitates the swift return of irregular migrants. Readmission cooperation is an important element in the framework of dialogue and cooperation with third countries of origin and the transit of irregular migrants, and its implementation in third countries should be supported in the interests of effective return policies at national and Union level.
(28)
In addition to supporting the return of persons as provided for in this Regulation, the Fund should also support other measures to counter irregular migration and the trafficking of migrants and to encourage compliance with legal migration rules, thereby safeguarding the integrity of Member States’ immigration systems.
(29)
The employment of irregular migrants undermines the development of a labour mobility policy built on legal migration schemes and endangers the rights of migrant workers, making them vulnerable to rights violations and abuse. The Fund should therefore support Member States, either directly or indirectly, in their implementation of Directive 2009/52/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (12), which prohibits the employment of illegally staying third-country nationals and provides for sanctions against employers who infringe that prohibition.
(30)
The Fund should support Member States, either directly or indirectly, in their implementation of Directive 2011/36/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council (13), which sets out provisions on assistance, support and protection for victims of trafficking in human beings. Those measures, including measures for the early identification of victims of trafficking in human beings and their referral to specialised services, should take into account the gender-specific nature of trafficking in human beings and child victims.
(31)
The Fund should complement the activities undertaken in the field of return by the European Border and Coast Guard Agency, governed by Regulation (EU) 2019/1896 of the European Parliament and of the Council (14), without providing an additional funding stream to that Agency.
(32)
In keeping with the principle of efficiency, synergies and consistency should be sought with other Union funds, and overlap between actions should be avoided.
(33)
In order to optimise the added value from investments funded wholly or in part through the Union budget, synergies should be sought, in particular, between the Fund and other Union programmes, including those under shared management. To maximise those synergies, key enabling mechanisms should be ensured, including cumulative funding for an action from the Fund and from another Union programme. Such cumulative funding should not exceed the total eligible costs of that action. For that purpose, this Regulation should set out appropriate rules, in particular on the possibility of declaring the same cost or expenditure under both the Fund and another Union programme on a pro-rata basis.
(34)
Actions in and in relation to third countries supported under the Fund should be carried out in synergy and coherence with other activities outside the Union supported through the Union’s external financing instruments. In particular, in implementing such actions, full coherence should be sought with the principles and general objectives of external Union policy, with the principle of policy coherence for development and consistency with the strategic programming documents for the country or region in question, and with the Union’s international commitments. In relation to the external dimension, the Fund should focus on supporting actions that are not development-oriented and that serve the interest of internal Union policies and should be consistent with activities undertaken within the Union. The Fund should target support to enhance cooperation with third countries and to reinforce key aspects of migration management in areas of interest to the Union’s migration policy.
(35)
Funding from the Union budget should concentrate on actions for which Union intervention can bring added value compared to actions by Member States alone. Financial support provided under this Regulation should contribute, in particular, to strengthening national and Union capabilities in the areas of asylum and migration in accordance with Article 80 TFEU.
(36)
When promoting actions supported by the Fund, the recipients of Union funding should provide information in the language or languages of the target audience. To ensure the visibility of Union funding, recipients of that funding should refer to its origin when communicating on the action. To that end, recipients should ensure that all communications to the media and the public display the Union emblem and explicitly mention the Union’s financial support.
(37)
It should be possible for the Commission to use financial resources under the Fund to promote best practices and the exchange of information as regards the implementation of the Fund.
(38)
The Commission should publish information on the support provided from the thematic facility under direct or indirect management in a timely manner and should update such information where appropriate. It should be possible to sort the data by specific objective, name of beneficiary, the amount legally committed and the nature and purpose of the measure.
(39)
A Member State may be deemed not to be compliant with the relevant Union acquis, including as regards the use of operating support under the Fund, if it has failed to fulfil its obligations under the Treaties in the area of asylum and return, if there is a clear risk of a serious breach by that Member State of Union values when implementing the acquis on asylum and return, or if an evaluation report under the Schengen evaluation and monitoring mechanism laid down in Council Regulation (EU) No 1053/2013 (15) has identified deficiencies in the relevant area.
(40)
The Fund should ensure that there is a fair and transparent distribution of resources to meet the objectives laid down in this Regulation. In order to meet transparency requirements, the Commission should publish information on the annual and multiannual work programmes of the thematic facility. In line with Regulation (EU) 2021/1060 of the European Parliament and of the Council (16), each Member State should ensure that within six months of the approval of its programme, there is a website in place on which information on its programme is available, covering the programme’s objectives, activities, available funding opportunities and achievements.
(41)
This Regulation should establish the initial amounts for Member States’ programmes which consist of a fixed amount as set out in Annex I and an amount calculated on the basis of the criteria laid down in that Annex and which reflect the needs and pressure experienced by different Member States in the areas of asylum, migration, integration and return. In view of the special needs of those Member States which have experienced the highest number of asylum applications per capita in 2018 and 2019, it is appropriate to increase the fixed amounts for Cyprus, Malta and Greece.
(42)
The initial amounts for Member States’ programmes should form the basis for Member States’ long-term investments. To take account of changes in migration flows, to address needs in respect of the management of asylum and reception systems and in respect of the integration of legally staying third-country nationals, and to develop legal migration and counter irregular migration through effective, safe and dignified return, an additional amount should be allocated to the Member States at the mid-term of the programming period taking into account objective criteria. That amount should be based on statistical data, in accordance with Annex I, to reflect the changes in the baseline situation of Member States.
(43)
To contribute to the achievement of the policy objective of the Fund, Member States should ensure that their programmes include actions addressing the specific objectives of the Fund, that the priorities chosen are in accordance with the implementation measures set out in Annex II, and that the allocation of resources between the objectives ensures that the overall policy objective can be met. To that end, Member States should, in principle, ensure a minimum allocation for strengthening and developing the Common European Asylum System, for strengthening and developing legal migration to the Member States in accordance with their economic and social needs, and for promoting and contributing to the effective integration and social inclusion of third-country nationals.
(44)
As challenges in the area of migration are constantly evolving, there is a need to adapt the allocation of funding to the changes in migration flows. To respond to pressing needs and changes in policy and Union priorities, and to steer funding towards actions with a high level of Union added value, part of the funding should be periodically allocated, via a thematic facility, to specific actions, to Union actions, to actions of local and regional authorities, to emergency assistance, to resettlement and humanitarian admission, and to additional support for Member States contributing to solidarity and responsibility efforts. The thematic facility offers flexibility in the management of the Fund and could also be implemented through Member States’ programmes.
(45)
Member States should be encouraged to use part of their programme allocation to fund the actions listed in Annex IV by benefiting from a greater Union contribution.
(46)
Part of the available resources under the Fund could be allocated to Member States’ programmes for the implementation of specific actions, in addition to the initial allocation. Those specific actions should be identified at Union level and should concern actions which require cooperation or actions necessary to address developments in the Union which require additional funding to be made available to one or more Member States.
(47)
The Fund should contribute to supporting operating costs that relate to the specific objectives of the Fund in order to enable Member States to maintain capabilities which are crucial for tasks and services which constitute a public service for the Union as a whole. Such support should consist of the full reimbursement of specific costs that relate to the objectives of the Fund and should form an integral part of the Member States’ programmes.
(48)
To complement the implementation of the policy objective of the Fund at national level through Member States’ programmes, the Fund should also provide support for actions at Union level. Such actions should serve overall strategic purposes within the scope of intervention of the Fund in relation to policy analysis and innovation, transnational mutual learning and partnerships, and the testing of new initiatives and actions across the Union.
(49)
In order to strengthen the Union’s capacity to immediately address exceptional migratory situations in one or more Member States characterised by a large or disproportionate influx of third-country nationals, which place significant and urgent demands on Member States’ reception and detention facilities and on their systems and procedures for asylum and migration management, or to immediately address exceptional migratory situations in third countries due to political developments or conflicts, it should be possible to provide emergency assistance in accordance with the framework set out in this Regulation.
(50)
This Regulation should ensure the continuation of the European Migration Network set up by Council Decision 2008/381/EC (17) and should provide financial assistance in accordance with its objectives and tasks.
(51)
The policy objective of the Fund will also be addressed through financial instruments and budgetary guarantees under the policy windows of the InvestEU Programme established by Regulation (EU) 2021/523 of the European Parliament and of the Council (18). Financial support should be used to address market failures or sub-optimal investment situations in a proportionate manner, and actions should not duplicate or crowd out private financing or distort competition in the internal market. Actions should have clear Union added value.
(52)
Blending operations have a voluntary nature and are operations supported by the Union budget that combine non-repayable forms of support, repayable forms of support, or both, from the Union budget with repayable forms of support from promotional, development or other public finance institutions, as well as support from commercial finance institutions and investors.
(53)
This Regulation lays down a financial envelope for the entire duration of the Fund which is to constitute the prime reference amount, within the meaning of point 18 of the Interinstitutional Agreement of 16 December 2020 between the European Parliament, the Council of the European Union and the European Commission on budgetary discipline, on cooperation in budgetary matters and on sound financial management, as well as on new own resources, including a roadmap towards the introduction of new own resources (19) for the European Parliament and the Council during the annual budgetary procedure.
(54)
Regulation (EU, Euratom) 2018/1046 of the European Parliament and of the Council (20) (the ‘Financial Regulation’) applies to the Fund. The Financial Regulation lays down rules on the implementation of the Union budget, including the rules on grants, prizes, procurement, indirect management, financial instruments, budgetary guarantees, financial assistance and the reimbursement of external experts.
(55)
For the purpose of implementation of actions under shared management, the Fund should form part of a coherent framework that consists of this Regulation, the Financial Regulation and Regulation (EU) 2021/1060.
(56)
Regulation (EU) 2021/1060 establishes the framework for action by ERDF, ESF+, the Cohesion Fund, the European Maritime, Fisheries and Aquaculture Fund, the Just Transition Fund, the Asylum, Migration and Integration Fund, the Internal Security Fund and the Instrument for Financial Support for Border Management and Visa Policy, as part of the Integrated Border Management Fund, and it lays down, in particular, the rules concerning programming, monitoring and evaluation, management and control for Union funds implemented under shared management. Additionally, it is necessary to specify the objectives of the Fund in this Regulation, and to lay down specific provisions concerning the actions that may be financed under the Fund.
(57)
A pre-financing scheme for the Fund is set out in Regulation (EU) 2021/1060, and a specific pre-financing rate is set in this Regulation. In addition, in order to ensure that it is possible to react promptly to emergency situations, it is appropriate to set a specific pre-financing rate for emergency assistance. The pre-financing scheme should ensure that Member States have the means to provide support to beneficiaries as of the start of the implementation of their programmes.
(58)
The types of financing and methods of implementation under this Regulation should be chosen on the basis of their ability to achieve the specific objectives of the actions and to deliver results, taking into account, in particular, the costs of controls, administrative burdens and the risk of non-compliance. When making that choice, use of lump sums, flat rates and unit costs, as well as financing not linked to costs as referred to in Article 125(1) of the Financial Regulation, should be considered.
(59)
In order to make the most use of the single audit principle, it is appropriate to set specific rules on the control and audit of projects in which international organisations, the internal control systems of which have been positively assessed by the Commission, are the beneficiaries. For such projects, managing authorities should have the possibility of limiting their management verifications, provided that the beneficiary delivers all necessary data and information on the progress of the project and on the eligibility of underlying expenditure in a timely manner. In addition, where a project implemented by such an international organisation is part of an audit sample, it should be possible for the audit authority to carry out its work in line with the principles of the International Standard on Related Services (ISRS) 4400, ‘Engagements to Perform Agreed-upon Procedures Regarding Financial Information’.
(60)
In accordance with the Financial Regulation, Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 883/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council (21) and Council Regulations (EC, Euratom) No 2988/95 (22), (Euratom, EC) No 2185/96 (23) and (EU) 2017/1939 (24), the financial interests of the Union are to be protected by means of proportionate measures, including measures relating to the prevention, detection, correction and investigation of irregularities, including fraud, to the recovery of funds lost, wrongly paid or incorrectly used, and, where appropriate, to the imposition of administrative penalties. In particular, in accordance with Regulations (Euratom, EC) No 2185/96 and (EU, Euratom) No 883/2013, the European Anti-Fraud Office (OLAF) has the power to carry out administrative investigations, including on-the-spot checks and inspections, with a view to establishing whether there has been fraud, corruption or any other illegal activity affecting the financial interests of the Union.
The European Public Prosecutor’s Office (EPPO) is empowered, in accordance with Regulation (EU) 2017/1939, to investigate and prosecute criminal offences affecting the financial interests of the Union as provided for in Directive (EU) 2017/1371 of the European Parliament and of the Council (25). In accordance with the Financial Regulation, any person or entity receiving Union funds is to fully cooperate in the protection of the financial interests of the Union, grant the necessary rights and access to the Commission, OLAF, the Court of Auditors and, in respect of those Member States participating in enhanced cooperation pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2017/1939, the EPPO, and ensure that any third parties involved in the implementation of Union funds grant equivalent rights. Member States should cooperate fully and provide all necessary assistance to Union institutions, bodies, offices and agencies in relation to the protection of the financial interests of the Union.
(61)
A third country which has concluded an agreement with the Union on the criteria and mechanisms for establishing the State responsible for examining a request for asylum lodged in a Member State or lodged in that third country should be allowed to participate in the Fund provided certain conditions are fulfilled.
(62)
Horizontal financial rules adopted by the European Parliament and the Council on the basis of Article 322 TFEU apply to this Regulation. Those rules are laid down in the Financial Regulation and determine in particular the procedure for establishing and implementing the budget through grants, procurement, prizes and indirect implementation, and provide for checks on the responsibility of financial actors. Rules adopted on the basis of Article 322 TFEU also include a general regime of conditionality for the protection of the Union budget.
(63)
Pursuant to Council Decision 2013/755/EU (26), persons and entities established in overseas countries or territories are eligible for funding subject to the rules and objectives of the Fund and possible arrangements applicable to the Member State to which the relevant overseas country or territory is linked.
(64)
Pursuant to Article 349 TFEU and in line with the communication of the Commission of 24 October 2017 entitled ‘A stronger and renewed strategic partnership with the EU’s outermost regions’, endorsed by the Council in its conclusions of 12 April 2018, the relevant Member States should ensure that their national strategies and programmes address the specific challenges the outermost regions face in managing migration. The Fund should support those Member States with adequate resources to help those regions manage migration sustainably and handle possible situations of pressure.
(65)
Pursuant to paragraphs 22 and 23 of the Interinstitutional Agreement of 13 April 2016 on Better Law-Making (27), the Fund should be evaluated on the basis of information collected in accordance with specific monitoring requirements, while avoiding an administrative burden, in particular on Member States, and overregulation. Those requirements, where appropriate, should include measurable indicators as a basis for evaluating the effects of the Fund on the ground. In order to measure the achievements of the Fund, indicators and related targets should be established in relation to each specific objective of the Fund. Those indicators should include qualitative and quantitative indicators.
(66)
Through indicators and financial reporting, the Commission and the Member States should monitor the implementation of the Fund in accordance with the relevant provisions of Regulation (EU) 2021/1060 and this Regulation. Starting from 2023, Member States should submit to the Commission annual performance reports covering the latest accounting year. Those reports should contain information on the progress made in the implementation of Member States’ programmes. The Member States should also submit summaries of those reports to the Commission. The Commission should translate those summaries into all official languages of the Union and make them publicly available on its website, together with the links to the Member States’ websites referred to in Regulation (EU) 2021/1060.
(67)
Reflecting the importance of tackling climate change in accordance with the Union’s commitments to implement the Paris Agreement adopted under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (28), and the commitment to the United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals, the actions under this Regulation should contribute to the achievement of a 30 % target of all multiannual financial framework expenditure being spent on mainstreaming climate objectives and to working towards the ambition of 7,5 % of the budget reflecting biodiversity expenditure in 2024 and 10 % in 2026 and 2027 while considering the existing overlaps between climate and biodiversity goals. The Fund should support activities that respect the climate and environmental standards and priorities of the Union and would do no significant harm to the environmental objectives within the meaning of Article 17 of Regulation (EU) 2020/852 of the European Parliament and of the Council (29).
(68)
Regulation (EU) No 514/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council (30) and any act applicable to the 2014–2020 programming period should continue to apply to programmes and projects supported under the Fund during the 2014–2020 programming period. Since the implementation period of Regulation (EU) No 514/2014 overlaps with the programming period covered by this Regulation, and in order to ensure continuity in the implementation of certain projects approved by that Regulation, provisions on the phasing of projects should be laid down. Each individual phase of the project should be implemented in accordance with the rules of the programming period under which it receives funding.
(69)
In order to supplement and amend non-essential elements of this Regulation, the power to adopt acts in accordance with Article 290 TFEU should be delegated to the Commission in respect of the list of actions eligible for support under Annex III; the list of actions eligible for higher co-financing rates under Annex IV; operating support under Annex VII and the further development of the monitoring and evaluation framework. It is of particular importance that the Commission carry out appropriate consultations during its preparatory work, including at expert level, and that those consultations be conducted in accordance with the principles laid down in the Interinstitutional Agreement of 13 April 2016 on Better Law Making. In particular, to ensure equal participation in the preparation of delegated acts, the European Parliament and the Council receive all documents at the same time as Member States’ experts, and their experts systematically have access to meetings of Commission expert groups dealing with the preparation of delegated acts.
(70)
In order to ensure uniform conditions for the implementation of this Regulation, implementing powers should be conferred on the Commission. Those powers should be exercised in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council (31). The examination procedure should be used for the adoption of implementing acts that lay down common obligations on Member States, in particular obligations concerning the provision of information to the Commission, and the advisory procedure should be used for the adoption of implementing acts relating to the detailed arrangements for the provision of information to the Commission in the framework of programming and reporting, given their purely technical nature. The Commission should adopt immediately applicable implementing acts relating to the adoption of decisions to award emergency assistance provided for by this Regulation where, in duly justified cases relating to the nature and purpose of such assistance, imperative grounds of urgency so require.
(71)
Since the objectives of this Regulation cannot be sufficiently achieved by the Member States, but can rather be better achieved at Union level, the Union may adopt measures, in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity as set out in Article 5 of the Treaty on European Union (TEU). In accordance with the principle of proportionality as set out in that Article, this Regulation does not go beyond what is necessary in order to achieve those objectives.
(72)
In accordance with Articles 1 and 2 of Protocol No 21 on the position of the United Kingdom and Ireland in respect of the area of freedom, security and justice, annexed to the TEU and to the TFEU, and without prejudice to Article 4 of that Protocol, Ireland is not taking part in the adoption of this Regulation and is not bound by it or subject to its application.
(73)
In accordance with Articles 1 and 2 of Protocol No 22 on the position of Denmark, annexed to the TEU and to the TFEU, Denmark is not taking part in the adoption of this Regulation and is not bound by it or subject to its application.
(74)
In accordance with Article 193(2) of the Financial Regulation, a grant may be awarded for an action which has already begun, provided that the applicant can demonstrate the need for starting the action prior to signature of the grant agreement. However, the costs incurred prior to the date of submission of the grant application are not eligible for Union financing except in duly justified exceptional cases. In order to avoid any disruption in Union support which could be prejudicial to the Union’s interests, it should be possible, for a limited period of time at the beginning of the 2021-2027 multiannual financial framework, that costs incurred in respect of actions supported under this Regulation under direct management and which have already begun, be considered eligible for Union financing as of 1 January 2021, even if those costs were incurred before the grant application or the request for assistance was submitted.
(75)
It is appropriate to align the period of application of this Regulation with that of Council Regulation (EU, Euratom) 2020/2093 (32).
(76)
In order to ensure continuity in providing support in the relevant policy area and to allow implementation to start from the beginning of the 2021-2027 multiannual financial framework, this Regulation should enter into force as a matter of urgency and should apply, with retroactive effect, from 1 January 2021,
HAVE ADOPTED THIS REGULATION:
