Article 35
Annual performance reports
1.   By 15 February 2023 and by 15 February of each subsequent year up to and including 2031, Member States shall submit to the Commission an annual performance report as referred to in Article 41(7) of Regulation (EU) 2021/1060.
The reporting period shall cover the last accounting year as defined in point (29) of Article 2 of Regulation (EU) 2021/1060 preceding the year of submission of the report. The report submitted by 15 February 2023 shall cover the period from 1 January 2021.
2.   The annual performance reports shall, in particular, set out information on:
(a)
the progress in the implementation of the Member State’s programme and in achieving the milestones and targets set out therein, taking into account the most recent data as required under Article 42 of Regulation (EU) 2021/1060;
(b)
any issues affecting the performance of the Member State’s programme and the action taken to address them, including information on any reasoned opinions delivered by the Commission in respect of infringement proceedings under Article 258 TFEU linked to the implementation of the Fund;
(c)
the complementarity between the actions supported under the Fund and the support provided by other Union funds, in particular those actions taken in or in relation to third countries;
(d)
contribution of the Member State’s programme to the implementation of the relevant Union acquis and action plans and to cooperation and solidarity between Member States;
(e)
the implementation of communication and visibility actions;
(f)
the fulfilment of the applicable enabling conditions and their application throughout the programming period, in particular compliance with fundamental rights;
(g)
the number of persons admitted through resettlement and humanitarian admission, by reference to the amounts set out in Article 19;
(h)
the number of applicants for international protection and of beneficiaries of international protection transferred from one Member State to another as referred to in Article 20;
(i)
the implementation of projects in or in relation to a third country.
The annual performance reports shall include a summary covering all the points set out in the first subparagraph of this paragraph. The Commission shall ensure that the summaries provided by Member States are translated into all official languages of the Union and made publicly available.
3.   The Commission may provide observations on annual performance reports within two months of the date of their receipt. Where the Commission does not provide observations by that deadline, the report shall be deemed to have been accepted.
4.   On its website, the Commission shall provide the links to the websites referred to in Article 49(1) of Regulation (EU) 2021/1060.
5.   In order to ensure uniform conditions for the implementation of this Article, the Commission shall adopt an implementing act establishing the template for the annual performance report. That implementing act shall be adopted in accordance with the advisory procedure referred to in Article 38(2).
