Article 20
Resources for the transfer of applicants for international protection or of beneficiaries of international protection
1.   A Member State shall receive, in addition to its allocation under Article 13(1) of this Regulation, an additional amount of EUR 10 000 for each applicant for international protection transferred from another Member State in accordance with Article 17 of Regulation (EU) No 604/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council (36) or as a result of similar forms of relocation.
2.   Where appropriate, Member States may also be eligible to receive the amount referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article for each family member of persons referred to in that paragraph, provided that those family members have been transferred to ensure family unity in accordance with Article 17 of Regulation (EU) No 604/2013 or have been transferred as a result of similar forms of relocation.
3.   Member States shall receive, in addition to their allocation under Article 13(1), an additional amount of EUR 10 000 for each beneficiary of international protection transferred from another Member State.
4.   Where appropriate, Member States may also be eligible to receive the respective amounts for family members of persons referred to in paragraph 3 if those family members have been transferred to ensure family unity.
5.   The Member State covering the cost of transfers referred to in paragraphs 1 to 4 shall receive a contribution of EUR 500 for each applicant for international protection or beneficiary of international protection transferred to another Member State.
6.   The amounts referred to in this Article shall take the form of financing not linked to costs in accordance with Article 125 of the Financial Regulation.
7.   The amounts referred to in paragraphs 1 to 5 of this Article shall be allocated to the Member State’s programme, provided that the person in respect of whom the amount is allocated was effectively transferred to a Member State or was registered as an applicant in the Member State responsible in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 604/2013, as applicable. Those amounts shall not be used for other actions in the Member State’s programme except in duly justified circumstances, as approved by the Commission through the amendment of that programme.
8.   For the purposes of control and audit, Member States shall retain the information necessary to allow the proper identification of the persons transferred and of the date of their transfer.
9.   To take account of current inflation rates, relevant developments in the field of relocation and other factors which might optimise the use of the financial incentive brought by the amounts referred to in paragraphs 1, 3 and 5 of this Article, the Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 37 to adjust, if deemed appropriate, and within the limits of available resources, those amounts.
