Article 11
General provisions on the implementation of the thematic facility
1.   The amount referred to in point (b) of Article 10(2) shall be allocated flexibly through a thematic facility using shared, direct or indirect management as set out in work programmes. Given the internal nature of the Fund, the thematic facility shall primarily serve internal Union policy in line with the specific objectives set out in Article 3(2).
Funding from the thematic facility shall be used for its components, which are as follows:
(a)
specific actions;
(b)
Union actions;
(c)
emergency assistance as referred to in Article 31;
(d)
resettlement and humanitarian admission;
(e)
support to Member States for the transfer of applicants for international protection or of beneficiaries of international protection as a part of solidarity efforts as referred to in Article 20; and
(f)
the European Migration Network as referred to in Article 26.
Technical assistance at the initiative of the Commission, as referred to in Article 35 of Regulation (EU) 2021/1060, shall also receive support from the amount referred to in point (b) of Article 10(2) of this Regulation.
2.   Funding from the thematic facility shall address priorities with a high Union added value or be used to respond to urgent needs in line with agreed Union priorities as reflected in Annex II.
The funding referred to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph, with the exception of funding used for emergency assistance in accordance with points (a) and (b) of the first subparagraph of Article 31(1), shall only support the actions listed in Annex III, including resettlement and humanitarian admission in accordance with Article 19 as part of the external dimension of the Union’s migration policy.
3.   The Commission shall engage with civil society organisations and relevant networks, in particular with a view to preparing and evaluating the work programmes for Union actions financed under the Fund.
4.   A minimum of 20 % of the resources from the initial allocation to the thematic facility shall be allocated to the specific objective set out in point (d) of Article 3(2).
5.   When funding from the thematic facility is provided under direct or indirect management to Member States, the Commission shall ensure that projects affected by a reasoned opinion delivered by the Commission in respect of infringement proceedings under Article 258 TFEU that put in doubt the legality and regularity of expenditure or the performance of those projects are not selected.
6.   For the purposes of Article 23 and Article 24(2) of Regulation (EU) 2021/1060, where funding from the thematic facility is implemented under shared management, the Member State concerned shall ensure that, and the Commission shall assess whether, the envisaged actions are not affected by a reasoned opinion delivered by the Commission in respect of infringement proceedings under Article 258 TFEU that put in doubt the legality and regularity of expenditure or the performance of the actions.
7.   The Commission shall establish the overall amount to be made available for the thematic facility under the annual appropriations of the Union budget.
8.   The Commission shall, by means of implementing acts, adopt financing decisions as referred to in Article 110 of the Financial Regulation for the thematic facility identifying objectives and actions to be supported and specifying the amounts for each of the components referred to in the second subparagraph of paragraph 1 of this Article. Financing decisions shall set out, where applicable, the overall amount reserved for blending operations. Financing decisions may be annual or multiannual and may cover one or more components of the thematic facility referred to in the second subparagraph of paragraph 1 of this Article. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 38(3) of this Regulation.
9.   The thematic facility shall, in particular, support actions falling under implementation measure 2(d) of Annex II that are implemented by national, regional and local authorities or civil society organisations. In that regard, a minimum of 5 % of the initial allocation to the thematic facility shall target the implementation of integration measures by local and regional authorities.
10.   The Commission shall ensure that the distribution of resources among the specific objectives set out in Article 3(2) is fair and transparent. The Commission shall report on the use and the distribution of the thematic facility between the components referred to in the second subparagraph of paragraph 1 of this Article, including on the support provided to actions in or in relation to third countries under the Union actions.
11.   Following the adoption of a financing decision as referred to in paragraph 8, the Commission may amend the Member States’ programmes accordingly.
