Article 3
Insider dealing, recommending or inducing another person to engage in insider dealing
1.   Member States shall take the necessary measures to ensure that insider dealing, recommending or inducing another person to engage in insider dealing as referred to in paragraphs 2 to 8, constitute criminal offences at least in serious cases and when committed intentionally.
2.   For the purposes of this Directive, insider dealing arises where a person possesses inside information and uses that information by acquiring or disposing of, for its own account or for the account of a third party, directly or indirectly, financial instruments to which that information relates.
3.   This Article applies to any person who possesses inside information as a result of:
(a)
being a member of the administrative, management or supervisory bodies of the issuer or emission allowance market participant;
(b)
having a holding in the capital of the issuer or emission allowance market participant;
(c)
having access to the information through the exercise of an employment, profession or duties; or
(d)
being involved in criminal activities.
This Article also applies to any person who has obtained inside information under circumstances other than those referred to in the first subparagraph where that person knows that it is inside information.
4.   The use of inside information by cancelling or amending an order concerning a financial instrument to which the information relates where the order was placed before the person concerned possessed the inside information shall also be considered to be insider dealing.
5.   In relation to auctions of emission allowances or other auctioned products based thereon that are held pursuant to Regulation (EU) No 1031/2010, the use of inside information referred to in paragraph 4 of this Article shall also comprise submitting, modifying or withdrawing a bid by a person for its own account or for the account of a third party.
6.   For the purposes of this Directive, recommending that another person engage in insider dealing, or inducing another person to engage in insider dealing, arises where the person possesses inside information and:
(a)
recommends, on the basis of that information, that another person acquire or dispose of financial instruments to which that information relates, or induces that person to make such an acquisition or disposal; or
(b)
recommends, on the basis of that information, that another person cancel or amend an order concerning a financial instrument to which that information relates, or induces that person to make such a cancellation or amendment.
7.   The use of the recommendations or inducements referred to in paragraph 6 amounts to insider dealing where the person using the recommendation or inducement knows that it is based upon inside information.
8.   For the purposes of this Article, it shall not be deemed from the mere fact that a person is or has been in possession of inside information that that person has used that information and has thus engaged in insider dealing on the basis of an acquisition or disposal, where its behaviour qualifies as legitimate behaviour under Article 9 of Regulation (EU) No 596/2014.
