Article 8
Access to the Programme
1.   The Programme shall foster cultural diversity at international level in line with the 2005 Unesco Convention.
2.   The Programme shall be open to the participation of the Member States.
3.   Without prejudice to paragraph 4, the Programme shall be open to the participation of the following countries provided that they pay additional appropriations and that, for the MEDIA Sub-programme, they meet the conditions set out in Directive 2010/13/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council (20):
(a)
acceding countries, candidate countries and potential candidate countries benefiting from a pre-accession strategy, in accordance with the general principles and general terms and conditions for the participation of those countries in Union programmes established in the respective framework agreements, Association Council decisions or similar agreements;
(b)
EFTA countries that are party to the EEA Agreement, in accordance with that Agreement;
(c)
the Swiss Confederation, on the basis of a bilateral agreement with that country;
(d)
countries covered by the European Neighbourhood Policy, in accordance with the procedures established with those countries following the framework agreements providing for their participation in Union programmes.
4.   The countries referred to in points (a) and (d) of paragraph 3 shall be precluded from participating in the Guarantee Facility.
5.   The Programme shall be open for bilateral or multilateral cooperation actions targeted at selected countries or regions on the basis of additional appropriations paid by, and specific arrangements to be agreed upon with, those countries or regions.
6.   The Programme shall permit cooperation and joint actions with countries not participating in the Programme and with international organisations which are active in the cultural and creative sectors such as Unesco, the Council of Europe, the OECD or the WIPO on the basis of joint contributions for the realisation of the Programme's objectives.
