Article 24
Financial provisions
1.   The financial envelope for the implementation of the Programme for the period from 1 January 2014 to 31 December 2020 is set at EUR 1 462 724 000 in current prices.
The annual appropriations shall be authorised by the European Parliament and the Council within the limits of the multiannual financial framework.
2.   The financial envelope referred to in paragraph 1 shall be allocated as follows:
(a)
at least 56 % for the MEDIA Sub-programme;
(b)
at least 31 % for the Culture Sub-programme;
(c)
a maximum of 13 % for the Cross-sectoral Strand, with at least 4 % being allocated for the transnational cooperation measures listed in Article 15 and for the Creative Europe Desks.
3.   The administrative costs in respect of the implementation of the Programme shall form part of the allocation set out in paragraph 2 and the total amount of those costs shall not exceed 7 % of the Programme's budget, of which 5 % shall be allocated to the implementation of the MEDIA Sub-programme and 2 % to the implementation of the Culture Sub-programme.
4.   The financial envelope referred to in paragraph 1 may cover expenses pertaining to preparatory, monitoring, control, audit and evaluation activities which are directly necessary for the management of the Programme and the achievement of its objectives, in particular studies, meetings of experts, information and communication actions, including institutional communication of the political priorities of the Union in so far as they are related to the general objectives of the Programme, and expenses connected with IT networks focusing on information processing and exchange, together with all other technical and administrative assistance expenses incurred by the Commission in managing the Programme.
5.   The financial envelope referred to in paragraph 1 may cover the technical and administrative assistance expenses necessary to ensure the transition between the measures adopted under Decisions No 1718/2006/EC, No 1855/2006/EC and No 1041/2009/EC and this Regulation.
If necessary, appropriations may be entered in the budget beyond 2020 to cover similar expenses, in order to allow for the management of actions not yet completed by 31 December 2020.
6.   By way of derogation from Article 130(2) of the Financial Regulation, and in duly justified cases, the Commission may consider costs directly linked to the implementation of the supported actions and activities as eligible even if they are incurred by the beneficiary before the submission of the grant application.
