Article 18
Recognition of certificates
1. Mutual recognition among Member States of certificates referred to in Article 4 held by seafarers who are nationals of Member States shall be subject to the provisions of Directives 89/48/EEC and 92/51/EEC.
2. Mutual recognition among Member States of certificates referred to in Article 4 held by seafarers who are not nationals of Member States shall also be subject to the provisions of Directives 89/48/EEC and 92/51/EEC.
3. Seafarers who do not possess the certificates referred to in Article 4 may be allowed to serve on ships flying the flag of a Member State, provided a decision on the recognition of their appropriate certificates has been adopted through the procedure set out below:
(a) when recognising, by endorsement, an appropriate certificate issued by a third country, the Member State shall proceed in accordance with the procedures and criteria set out in Annex II;
(b) Member States shall notify the Commission, which shall inform the other Member States, of the appropriate certificates they have recognised or intend to recognise in accordance with the criteria referred to in point (a);
(c) if within three months of Member States having been informed by the Commission in accordance with point (b) an objection is raised by a Member State or the Commission on the basis of the criteria referred to in point (a), the Commission shall subject the matter to the procedure referred to in Article 23(2). The Member State concerned shall take appropriate measures to implement the decisions taken in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 23(2);
(d) when an appropriate certificate issued by a third country has been recognised under the above procedure, and if, after the completion of its evaluation the MSC has not been able to identify the third country as having demonstrated that full and complete effect is given to the provisions of the STCW Convention, the Commission shall subject the matter to the procedure referred to in Article 23(2) in order to reassess the recognition of the certificates issued by that country. The Member State concerned shall take appropriate measures to implement the decisions taken in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 23(2);
(e) the Commission shall draw up and update a list of the appropriate certificates that have been recognised under the above procedure. The list shall be published in the Official Journal of the European Communities, C Series.
4. Notwithstanding Article 5(6), a Member State may, if circumstances require, allow a seafarer to serve in a capacity other than radio officer or radio operator, except as provided by the Radio Regulations, for a period not exceeding three months on board a ship flying its flag, while holding an appropriate and valid certificate issued and endorsed as required by a third country, but not yet endorsed for recognition by the Member State concerned so as to render it appropriate for service on board a ship flying its flag. Documentary proof shall be kept readily available that application for an endorsement has been submitted to the competent authorities.

