Article 1
Definitions
For the purposes of this Directive:
1. "master" shall mean the person having command of a ship;
2. "officer" shall mean a member of the crew, other than the master, designated as such by national law or regulations or, in the absence of such designation, by collective agreement or custom;
3. "deck officer" shall mean an officer qualified in accordance with the provisions of Chapter II of Annex I;
4. "chief mate" shall mean the officer next in rank to the master upon whom the command of the ship will fall in the event of the incapacity of the master;
5. "engineer officer" shall mean an officer qualified in accordance with the provisions of Chapter III of Annex I;
6. "chief engineer officer" shall mean the senior engineer officer responsible for the mechanical propulsion and the operation and maintenance of the mechanical and electrical installations of the ship;
7. "second engineer officer" shall mean the engineer officer next in rank to the chief engineer officer upon whom the responsibility for the mechanical propulsion and the operation and maintenance of the mechanical and electrical installations of the ship will fall in the event of the incapacity of the chief engineer officer;
8. "assistant engineer officer" shall mean a person under training to become an engineer officer and designated as such by national law or regulations;
9. "radio operator" shall mean a person holding an appropriate certificate issued or recognised by the competent authorities under the provisions of the Radio Regulations, as defined in point 18;
10. "rating" shall mean a member of the ship's crew other than the master or an officer;
11. "seagoing ship" shall mean a ship other than those which navigate exclusively in inland waters or in waters within, or closely adjacent to, sheltered waters or areas where port regulations apply;
12. "ship flying the flag of a Member State" shall mean a ship registered in and flying the flag of a Member State in accordance with its legislation. A ship not corresponding to this definition shall be regarded as a ship flying the flag of a third country;
13. "near-coastal voyages" shall mean voyages in the vicinity of a Member State as defined by that Member State;
14. "propulsion power" shall mean the total maximum continuous rated output power in kilowatts of all of a ship's main propulsion machinery which appears on the ship's certificate of registry or other official document;
15. "oil-tanker" shall mean a ship constructed and used for the carriage of petroleum and petroleum products in bulk;
16. "chemical tanker" shall mean a ship constructed or adapted and used for the carriage in bulk of any liquid product listed in Chapter 17 of the International Bulk Chemical Code as in force on 25 May 1998;
17. "liquefied-gas tanker" shall mean a ship constructed or adapted and used for the carriage in bulk of any liquefied gas or other product listed in Chapter 19 of the International Gas Carrier Code as in force on 25 May 1998;
18. "Radio Regulations" shall mean the revised radio regulations, adopted by the World Administrative Radio Conference for the Mobile Service as in force on 25 May 1998;
19. "passenger ship" shall mean a seagoing ship which carries more than 12 passengers;
20. "fishing vessel" shall mean a vessel used for catching fish or other living resources of the sea;
21. "STCW Convention" shall mean the International Convention on Standards of Training, Certification and Watchkeeping for Seafarers as it applies to the matters concerned taking into account the transitional provisions of Article VII and Regulation I/15 of the Convention and including, where appropriate, the applicable provisions of the STCW code, all being applied as in force on 25 May 1998;
22. "radio duties" shall include, as appropriate, watchkeeping and technical maintenance and repairs conducted in accordance with the Radio Regulations, the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea (1974), (SOLAS Convention) as in force on 25 May 1998 and, at the discretion of each Member State, the relevant recommendations of the International Maritime Organisation (IMO);
23. "ro-ro passenger ship" shall mean a passenger ship with ro-ro cargo spaces or special-category spaces as defined in the SOLAS Convention as in force on 25 May 1998;
24. "STCW Code" shall mean the Seafarers' Training, Certification and Watchkeeping (STCW) Code as adopted by Resolution 2 of the 1995 STCW Conference of Parties, as in force on 25 May 1998;
25. "function" shall mean a group of tasks, duties and responsibilities, as specified in the STCW code, necessary for ship operation, safety of life at sea or protection of the marine environment;
26. "company" shall mean the owner of the ship or any other organisation or person such as the manager or the bareboat charterer who has assumed the responsibility for operation of the ship from the shipowner and who, on assuming such responsibility, has agreed to take over all the duties and responsibilities imposed on the company by these regulations;
27. "appropriate certificate" shall mean a certificate issued and endorsed in accordance with this Directive and entitling the lawful holder thereof to serve in the capacity and perform the functions involved at the level of responsibility specified therein on a ship of the type, tonnage, power and means of propulsion concerned while engaged on the particular voyage concerned;
28. "seagoing service" shall mean service on board a ship relevant to the issue of a certificate or other qualification;
29. "approved" shall mean approved by a Member State in accordance with this Directive;
30. "third country" shall mean any country which is not a Member State;
31. "month" shall mean a calendar month or 30 days made up of periods of less than one month.

