Article 4
Organisational arrangements
1.   The Commission shall ensure the coordination of the GMES programme with activities at national, Union and international levels, notably GEOSS. The implementation and operation of GMES shall be based on partnerships between the Union and the Member States, in compliance with their respective rules and procedures. The voluntary contributions of Member States, and the potential synergies with relevant national, Union and international initiatives, shall be coordinated in accordance with the advisory procedure referred to in Article 16(5).
2.   The Commission shall manage the funds allocated to the activities under this Regulation in accordance with the Financial Regulation and with the management procedure referred to in Article 16(4). It shall ensure the complementarity and consistency of the GMES programme with other relevant Union policies, instruments and actions, relating in particular to the environment, security, competitiveness and innovation, cohesion, research (in particular the activities of the Seventh Framework Programme linked to GMES, without prejudice to Decision No 1982/2006/EC), transport and competition, international cooperation, the European Global Navigation Satellite Systems (GNSS) programmes, the protection of personal data and existing intellectual property rights, Directive 2007/2/EC, the Shared Environmental Information System (SEIS) and Union activities in the field of emergency response.
3.   Since GMES is a user-driven programme, the Commission shall ensure that service specifications match user needs. To that end, it shall establish a transparent mechanism for regular user involvement and consultation, enabling identification of user requirements at Union and national level. The Commission shall ensure coordination with relevant public sector users in Member States, third countries and international organisations. Service data requirements shall be established independently by the Commission after consultation of the User Forum.
4.   Technical coordination and implementation of the GMES space component shall be delegated to ESA, relying on the European Organisation for the Exploitation of Meteorological Satellites (EUMETSAT) where necessary.
5.   The Commission shall entrust the coordination of the technical implementation of the GMES services, where appropriate, to competent Union bodies or intergovernmental organisations.
