Article 22
Control of compliance
1.   Member States shall ensure that their competent authorities may at any time control whether a craft is carrying a valid certificate in accordance with Article 7 and whether it satisfies the requirements for the issuance of such a certificate.
In the case of failure to comply with the requirements, the competent authorities shall take appropriate measures in accordance with paragraphs 2 to 5 of this Article. They shall also request that the owner of the craft or its representative takes all necessary measures to remedy the situation within a time limit set by the competent authorities.
The competent authority which issued the certificate carried on the craft shall be informed of such failures within seven days of the control.
2.   Where a valid certificate is not being carried, the craft may be prevented from proceeding with its voyage.
3.   If, during the control, the competent authorities find that the craft constitutes a manifest danger for the persons on board, the environment or the safety of the navigation, they may prevent the craft from proceeding with its voyage until the necessary steps have been taken to remedy the situation.
The competent authorities may also prescribe proportionate measures which will enable the craft to proceed safely, where appropriate on termination of its transport operations, to a place where it will either be inspected or repaired.
4.   A Member State which has prevented a craft from proceeding with its voyage, or has notified the owner of the craft or its representative of its intention to so prevent it if the defects found are not corrected, shall inform the competent authority in the Member State which issued or last renewed the craft's certificate, within seven days of the decision which it has taken or intends to take.
5.   Any decision to interrupt the passage of a craft taken in the implementation of this Directive shall state in detail the reasons on which it is based. Such decision shall be notified without delay to the party concerned, who shall at the same time be informed of the appeal procedures available under the laws in force in the Member State concerned and of their time limits.
