Article 8
Rules on the introduction of operating restrictions
1.   Before introducing an operating restriction, the competent authorities shall give to the Member States, the Commission and the relevant interested parties six months’ notice, ending at least two months prior to the determination of the slot coordination parameters as defined in point (m) of Article 2 of Council Regulation (EEC) No 95/93 (10) for the airport concerned for the relevant scheduling period.
2.   Following the assessment carried out in accordance with Article 6, the notification shall be accompanied by a written report in accordance with the requirements specified in Article 5 explaining the reasons for introducing the operating restriction, the noise abatement objective established for the airport, the measures that were considered to meet that objective, and the evaluation of the likely cost-effectiveness of the various measures considered, including, where relevant, their cross-border impact.
3.   At the request of a Member State or on its own initiative, the Commission may, within a period of three months after the day on which it receives notice under paragraph 1, review the process for the introduction of an operating restriction. Where the Commission finds that the introduction of a noise-related operating restriction does not follow the process set out in this Regulation, it may notify the relevant competent authority accordingly. The relevant competent authority shall examine the Commission notification and inform the Commission of its intentions before introducing the operating restriction.
4.   Where the operating restriction concerns the withdrawal of marginally compliant aircraft from an airport, no additional services above the number of movements with marginally compliant aircraft in the corresponding period of the previous year shall be allowed at that airport six months after the notification referred to in paragraph 1. The Member States shall ensure that the competent authorities decide on the annual rate for reducing the number of movements of marginally compliant aircraft of affected operators at that airport, taking due account of the age of the aircraft and the composition of the total fleet. Without prejudice to Article 5(4), that rate shall not be more than 25 % of the number of movements of marginally compliant aircraft for each operator serving that airport.
