Article 5
Permits and registration
1.   Member States shall take the necessary measures to ensure that no new medium combustion plant is operated without a permit or without being registered.
2.   Member States shall take the necessary measures to ensure that, as of 1 January 2024, no existing medium combustion plant with a rated thermal input greater than 5 MW is operated without a permit or without being registered.
Member States shall take the necessary measures to ensure that, as of 1 January 2029, no existing medium combustion plant with a rated thermal input of less than or equal to 5 MW is operated without a permit or without being registered.
3.   Member States shall specify the procedure for granting a permit or for registration in respect of medium combustion plants. Those procedures shall include at least an obligation on the operator to inform the competent authority of the operation of, or the intention to operate, a medium combustion plant and to provide at least the information listed in Annex I.
4.   The competent authority shall register, or start the procedure for granting a permit to, the medium combustion plant within one month of the operator providing the information referred to in paragraph 3. The competent authority shall inform the operator of such registration or of the start of the procedure for granting a permit.
5.   The competent authority shall hold a register with information on each medium combustion plant including the information listed in Annex I and the information obtained pursuant to Article 9. Existing medium combustion plants shall be included in the register from the date of registration or from the date when granted a permit in accordance with this Directive. The competent authority shall make the information contained in the register available to the public, including via the internet, in accordance with Directive 2003/4/EC.
6.   Without prejudice to the obligation for medium combustion plants to hold a permit or be registered, Member States may include requirements for certain categories of medium combustion plants in general binding rules. Where general binding rules are adopted, the permit or the registration may simply include a reference to such rules.
7.   For medium combustion plants which are part of an installation covered by Chapter II of Directive 2010/75/EU, the requirements of this Article shall be deemed to be fulfilled through compliance with that Directive.
8.   Any permit granted or registration carried out pursuant to other national or Union legislation may be combined with the permit or registration required under paragraph 1 to form a single permit or registration provided that that single permit or registration contains the information required under this Article.
