Article 7
Obligations of the operator
1.   Member States shall ensure that the operator carries out monitoring of emissions in accordance with, as a minimum, Part 1 of Annex III.
2.   For medium combustion plants using multiple fuels, the monitoring of emissions shall be done while firing a fuel or fuel mix that is likely to result in the highest level of emissions and during a period representing normal operating conditions.
3.   The operator shall keep a record of and process all monitoring results in such a way as to enable the verification of compliance with the emission limit values in accordance with the rules set out in Part 2 of Annex III.
4.   For medium combustion plants using secondary abatement equipment in order to meet the emission limit values, the operator shall keep a record of, or information proving, the effective continuous operation of that equipment.
5.   The operator of a medium combustion plant shall keep the following:
(a)
the permit or the proof of registration by the competent authority and, if relevant, its updated version and related information;
(b)
the monitoring results and information referred to in paragraphs 3 and 4;
(c)
where applicable, a record of operating hours as referred to in Article 6(3) and in Article 6(8);
(d)
a record of the type and quantities of fuels used in the plant and of any malfunctions or breakdown of secondary abatement equipment;
(e)
a record of the events of non-compliance and the measures taken, as referred to in paragraph 7.
The data and information referred to in points (b) to (e) of the first subparagraph shall be kept for a period of at least six years.
6.   The operator shall, without undue delay, make available the data and information listed in paragraph 5 to the competent authority upon request. The competent authority may make such a request in order to allow the check of compliance with the requirements of this Directive. The competent authority shall make such a request if a member of the public requests access to the data or information listed in paragraph 5.
7.   In the event of non-compliance with the emission limit values set out in Annex II, the operator shall take the measures necessary to ensure that compliance is restored within the shortest possible time, without prejudice to the measures required under Article 8. Member States shall lay down rules for the type, frequency and format of information concerning events of non-compliance to be provided by operators to the competent authority.
8.   The operator shall provide the competent authority with all necessary assistance to enable it to carry out any inspections and site visits, to take samples and to gather any information necessary for the performance of its duties for the purposes of this Directive.
9.   The operator shall keep the periods of start-up and shut-down of the medium combustion plant as short as possible.
