Article 6
Emission limit values
1.   Without prejudice to Chapter II of Directive 2010/75/EU, where applicable, the emission limit values set out in Annex II to this Directive shall apply to medium combustion plants.
The emission limit values set out in Annex II shall not apply to medium combustion plants located in the Canary Islands, French Overseas Departments, the Azores and Madeira. The Member States concerned shall set emission limit values for those plants in order to reduce their emissions to air and the potential risks to human health and the environment.
2.   From 1 January 2025, emissions into the air of SO2, NOx and dust from an existing medium combustion plant with a rated thermal input greater than 5 MW shall not exceed the emission limit values set out in Tables 2 and 3 of Part 1 of Annex II.
From 1 January 2030, emissions into the air of SO2, NOx and dust from an existing medium combustion plant with a rated thermal input of less than or equal to 5 MW shall not exceed the emission limit values set out in Tables 1 and 3 of Part 1 of Annex II.
3.   Member States may exempt existing medium combustion plants which do not operate more than 500 operating hours per year, as a rolling average over a period of five years, from compliance with the emission limit values set out in Tables 1, 2 and 3 of Part 1 of Annex II.
Member States may extend the limit referred to in the first subparagraph to 1 000 operating hours in the following cases of emergency or extraordinary circumstances:
—
for backup power production in connected islands in the event of an interruption of the main power supply to an island,
—
medium combustion plants used for heat production in cases of exceptionally cold weather events.
In all cases set out in this paragraph, an emission limit value for dust of 200 mg/Nm3 shall apply for plants firing solid fuels.
4.   Existing medium combustion plants which are part of SIS or MIS shall comply with the emission limit values set out in Tables 1, 2 and 3 of Part 1 of Annex II from 1 January 2030.
5.   Until 1 January 2030, Member States may exempt existing medium combustion plants with a rated thermal input greater than 5 MW from compliance with the emission limit values set out in Annex II provided that at least 50 % of the useful heat production of the plant, as a rolling average over a period of five years, is delivered in the form of steam or hot water to a public network for district heating. In the event of such exemption, the emission limit values set by the competent authority shall not exceed 1 100 mg/Nm3 for SO2 and 150 mg/Nm3 for dust.
Until 1 January 2030, Member States may exempt medium combustion plants firing solid biomass as the main fuel, which are situated in zones where, according to assessments under Directive 2008/50/EC, conformity with the limit values of that Directive is ensured, from compliance with the emission limit values for dust set out in Annex II to this Directive. In the event of such exemption, the emission limit values set by the competent authority shall not exceed 150 mg/Nm3 for dust.
The competent authority shall in any case ensure that no significant pollution is caused and that a high level of protection of the environment as a whole is achieved.
6.   Until 1 January 2030, Member States may exempt existing medium combustion plants with a rated thermal input greater than 5 MW and which are used to drive gas compressor stations required to ensure the safety and security of a national gas transmission system, from compliance with the emission limit values for NOx set out in Table 3 of Part 1 of Annex II.
7.   From 20 December 2018, emissions into the air of SO2, NOx and dust from a new medium combustion plant shall not exceed the emission limit values set out in Part 2 of Annex II.
8.   Member States may exempt new medium combustion plants which do not operate more than 500 operating hours per year, as a rolling average over a period of three years, from compliance with the emission limit values set out in Part 2 of Annex II. In the event of such exemption, an emission limit value for dust of 100 mg/Nm3 shall apply for plants firing solid fuels.
9.   In zones or parts of zones not complying with the air quality limit values laid down in Directive 2008/50/EC, Member States shall assess the need to apply, for individual medium combustion plants in those zones or parts of zones, stricter emission limit values than those set out in this Directive, as part of the development of air quality plans referred to in Article 23 of Directive 2008/50/EC, taking into account the results of the information exchange referred to in paragraph 10 of this Article, provided that applying such emission limit values would effectively contribute to a noticeable improvement of air quality.
10.   The Commission shall organise an exchange of information with Member States, the industries concerned and non-governmental organisations on the emission levels achievable with best available and emerging technologies and the related costs.
The Commission shall publish the results of the exchange of information.
11.   The competent authority may grant a derogation for a maximum period of six months from the obligation to comply with the emission limit values provided for in paragraphs 2 and 7 for SO2 in respect of a medium combustion plant which normally uses low-sulphur fuel, in cases where the operator is unable to comply with those emission limit values because of an interruption in the supply of low-sulphur fuel resulting from a serious shortage.
Member States shall inform the Commission, within one month, of any derogation granted under the first subparagraph.
12.   The competent authority may grant a derogation from the obligation to comply with the emission limit values provided for in paragraphs 2 and 7 in cases where a medium combustion plant using only gaseous fuel has to resort exceptionally to the use of other fuels because of a sudden interruption in the supply of gas and, for this reason, would need to be equipped with secondary abatement equipment. The period for which such a derogation is granted shall not exceed ten days except where the operator demonstrates to the competent authority that a longer period is justified.
Member States shall inform the Commission, within one month, of any derogation granted under the first subparagraph.
13.   Where a medium combustion plant simultaneously uses two or more fuels, the emission limit value for each pollutant shall be calculated by:
(a)
taking the emission limit value relevant for each individual fuel as set out in Annex II;
(b)
determining the fuel-weighted emission limit value, which is obtained by multiplying the individual emission limit value referred to in point (a) by the thermal input delivered by each fuel, and dividing the product of multiplication by the sum of the thermal inputs delivered by all fuels; and
(c)
aggregating the fuel-weighted emission limit values.
