Article 44
Tasks of distribution system operators
1.   Each distribution system operator shall be responsible for ensuring the long-term ability of the system to meet reasonable demands for the distribution of natural gas in accordance with Articles 55 and 57 of this Directive including for biomethane injection, and for operating, maintaining and developing or decommissioning under economic conditions a secure, reliable and efficient system in its area, with due regard for the environment, the obligations laid down in Regulation (EU) 2024/1787 and energy efficiency.
2.   When so decided by regulatory authorities, distribution system operators may be responsible for ensuring efficient gas quality management in their systems in line with applicable gas quality standards, where necessary for system management due to the injection of renewable gas and low-carbon gas.
3.   In any event, the distribution system operator shall not discriminate between system users or classes of system users, particularly in favour of its related undertakings.
4.   Each distribution system operator shall provide any other distribution, transmission, LNG, or natural gas storage system operator with sufficient information to ensure that the transport and storage of natural gas take place in a manner compatible with the secure and efficient operation of the interconnected system.
5.   Each distribution system operator shall provide system users with the information they need for efficient access to, including use of, the system.
6.   Where a distribution system operator is responsible for balancing the distribution system, rules adopted by it for that purpose shall be objective, transparent and non-discriminatory, including rules for the charging of system users for energy imbalance. Terms and conditions, including rules and tariffs, for the provision of such services by distribution system operators shall be established pursuant to a methodology compatible with Article 78(7) in a non-discriminatory and cost-reflective manner and shall be published.
7.   Distribution system operators shall cooperate with transmission system operators to ensure the effective participation of market participants connected to their infrastructure in retail, wholesale and balancing markets in the entry-exit system to which the distribution system belongs or is connected to.
8.   The distribution system operators shall not be entitled to refuse economically reasonable and technically feasible connection requests of a new or existing but not yet connected production facility for renewable gas and low-carbon gas, except under the conditions set out in Article 38.
