Article 5
Access to affordable energy during a natural gas price crisis
1.   The Council may, acting on a proposal from the Commission, by means of an implementing decision, declare a regional or Union-wide natural gas price crisis, if the following conditions are met:
(a)
the existence of very high average prices in wholesale natural gas markets of at least two-and-a-half times the average price during the previous five years, and at least 180 EUR/MWh, which is expected to continue for at least six months, subject to the calculation of the average price during the previous five years not taking into account periods during which a regional or Union-wide natural gas price crisis was declared;
(b)
sharp increases in natural gas retail prices in the range of 70 % occur which are expected to continue for at least three months.
2.   The implementing decision referred to in paragraph 1 shall specify its period of validity which may be for a period of up to one year. That period may be extended in accordance with the procedure set out in paragraph 8 for consecutive periods of up to one year.
3.   The declaration of a regional or Union-wide natural gas price crisis pursuant to paragraph 1 shall ensure a fair competition and trade across all Member States affected by the implementing decision so that the internal market is not unduly distorted.
4.   Where the conditions laid down in paragraph 1 are fulfilled, the Commission shall submit a proposal to declare a regional or Union-wide natural gas price crisis which shall include the proposed period of validity of the implementing decision.
5.   The Council, acting by a qualified majority, may amend a Commission proposal submitted pursuant to paragraph 4 or 8.
6.   Where the Council has adopted an implementing decision pursuant to paragraph 1 of this Article, Member States may, for the duration of the validity of that decision, apply temporary targeted public interventions in price setting for the supply of natural gas to small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), household customers and essential social services as defined in Article 2, point (4), of Regulation (EU) 2017/1938. Such public interventions shall:
(a)
be limited to at most 70 % of the beneficiary’s consumption during the same period of the previous year and retain an incentive for demand reduction;
(b)
comply with the conditions set out in Article 4(4) and (7);
(c)
where relevant, comply with the conditions set out in paragraph 7;
(d)
be designed to minimise any negative fragmentation of the internal market.
7.   Where the Council has adopted an implementing decision pursuant to paragraph 1 of this Article, Member States may for the duration of the validity of that decision, by way of derogation from Article 4(7), point (c), when applying targeted public interventions in price setting for the supply of natural gas pursuant to Article 4(6) or to paragraph 6 of this Article, exceptionally and temporarily set a price for the supply of natural gas which is below cost provided that the following conditions are fulfilled:
(a)
the price set for household customers only applies, at most, to 80 % of median household consumption and retains an incentive for demand reduction;
(b)
there is no discrimination between suppliers;
(c)
suppliers are compensated for supplying below cost in a transparent and non-discriminatory manner;
(d)
all suppliers are eligible to provide offers for the price for the supply of natural gas which is below cost on the same basis;
(e)
measures proposed do not distort the internal market for natural gas.
8.   In due time before the expiry of the period of validity specified pursuant to paragraph 2, the Commission shall assess whether the conditions laid down in paragraph 1 continue to be fulfilled. If the Commission considers that the conditions laid down in paragraph 1 continue to be fulfilled, it shall submit to the Council a proposal to extend the period of validity of an implementing decision adopted pursuant to paragraph 1. Where the Council decides to extend the period of validity, paragraphs 6 and 7 shall apply during such extended period.
The Commission shall continuously assess and monitor the impact resulting from any measures adopted under this Article and publish on a regular basis the results of such assessments.
