Article 82
Record keeping
1.   Member States shall require supply undertakings to keep at the disposal of the national authorities, including the regulatory authority and the national competition authorities, and of the Commission, for the fulfilment of their tasks, for at least five years, the relevant data relating to all transactions in natural gas and hydrogen supply contracts and natural gas and hydrogen derivatives with wholesale customers and transmission system operators, natural gas storage and LNG operators as well as hydrogen network, storage and terminal operators.
2.   The data shall include details on the characteristics of the relevant transactions such as duration, delivery and settlement rules, the quantity, the dates and times of execution and the transaction prices and means of identifying the wholesale customer concerned, as well as specified details of all unsettled natural gas and hydrogen supply contracts and natural gas and hydrogen derivatives.
3.   The regulatory authority may decide to make available to market participants elements of this information provided that commercially sensitive information on individual market participants or individual transactions is not released. This paragraph shall not apply to information about financial instruments which fall within the scope of Directive 2014/65/EU.
4.   The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts to supplement this Directive in accordance with Article 90, by establishing guidelines which define the methods and arrangements for record keeping as well as the form and content of the data that shall be kept.
5.   With respect to transactions in natural gas and hydrogen derivatives of supply undertakings with wholesale customers and natural gas transmission system operators, natural gas storage and LNG operators as well as hydrogen network, storage and terminal operators, this Article shall apply only once the Commission has adopted the guidelines referred to in paragraph 4.
6.   This Article shall not create additional obligations towards the authorities referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article for entities falling within the scope of Directive 2014/65/EU.
7.   In the event that the authorities referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article need access to data kept by entities falling within the scope of Directive 2014/65/EU, the authorities responsible under that Directive shall provide them with the required data.
CHAPTER XI

FINAL PROVISIONS

