Article 79
Decisions and complaints
1.   Regulatory authorities shall have the authority to require natural gas transmission, natural gas storage, LNG and distribution system operators, hydrogen storage and terminal operators, and hydrogen network operators if necessary, to modify the terms and conditions, including tariffs and methodologies referred to in this Article, to ensure that they are proportionate and applied in a non-discriminatory manner. In the event that the access regime to natural gas storage is established pursuant to Article 33(3), that task shall exclude the modification of tariffs. In the event that the access regime to hydrogen networks, hydrogen facilities or hydrogen storage is based on negotiated third-party access in accordance with Article 35(4), Article 36(1) or Article 37(2), that task shall exclude the modification of tariffs. In the event of delay in the fixing of natural gas transmission and distribution tariffs and, where appropriate, hydrogen network tariffs, regulatory authorities shall have the power to fix or approve provisional transmission and distribution tariffs or methodologies and hydrogen network tariffs or methodologies and to decide on the appropriate compensatory measures if the final tariffs or methodologies deviate from those provisional tariffs or methodologies.
2.   Any party having a complaint against a natural gas transmission, natural gas storage, LNG or distribution system operator or a hydrogen network, storage or terminal operator in relation to that operator’s obligations under this Directive may refer the complaint to the regulatory authority which, acting as a dispute settlement authority, shall issue a decision within a period of two months after receipt of the complaint. That period may be extended by two months where additional information is sought by the regulatory authority. That extended period may be further extended with the agreement of the complainant. The regulatory authority’s decision shall have binding effect unless and until overruled on appeal.
3.   Any party who is affected and who has a right to complain concerning a decision on methodologies taken pursuant to this Article or, where the regulatory authority has a duty to consult, concerning the proposed tariffs or methodologies, may, within two months, or a shorter time period as provided by Member States, following publication of the decision or proposal for a decision, submit a complaint for review. Such a complaint shall not have suspensive effect.
4.   Member States shall create appropriate and efficient mechanisms for regulation, control and transparency so as to avoid any abuse of a dominant position, in particular to the detriment of consumers, and any predatory behaviour. Those mechanisms shall take account of the provisions of the TFEU, and in particular Article 102 thereof.
5.   Member States shall ensure that the appropriate measures are taken, including administrative action or criminal proceedings in conformity with their national law, against the natural or legal persons responsible where confidentiality rules imposed by this Directive have not been respected.
6.   Complaints referred to in paragraphs 2 and 3 shall be without prejudice to the exercise of rights of appeal under Union or national law.
7.   Decisions taken by regulatory authorities shall be fully reasoned and justified to allow for judicial review. The decisions shall be available to the public while preserving the confidentiality of commercially sensitive information.
8.   Member States shall ensure that suitable mechanisms exist at national level under which a party affected by a decision of a regulatory authority has a right of appeal to a body independent of the parties involved and of any government.
