Article 80
Regional cooperation between regulatory authorities on cross-border issues
1.   Regulatory authorities shall closely consult and cooperate with each other, and in particular within ACER, and shall provide each other and ACER with any information necessary for the fulfilment of their tasks under this Directive. In respect of the information exchanged, the receiving authority shall ensure the same level of confidentiality as that required of the originating authority.
2.   Regulatory authorities shall cooperate at least at a regional level to:
(a)
foster the creation of operational arrangements in order to enable an optimal management of the network, promote joint natural gas and hydrogen exchanges and the allocation of cross-border capacity, and enable an adequate level of interconnection capacity, including through new interconnections, within the region and between regions to allow for development of effective competition and improvement of security of supply without discriminating between supply undertakings in different Member States;
(b)
coordinate the development of all network codes for the relevant transmission system operators, hydrogen network operators and other market participants;
(c)
coordinate the development of the rules governing the management of congestion;
(d)
ensure regulatory compliance of legal entities fulfilling transmission operators’ and network operators’ tasks at cross-border or regional level.
3.   Regulatory authorities shall have the right to enter into cooperative arrangements with each other to foster regulatory cooperation.
4.   The actions referred to in paragraph 2 shall be carried out, as appropriate, in close consultation with other relevant national authorities and without prejudice to their specific competencies.
5.   The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 90 in order to supplement this Directive by establishing guidelines on the extent of the duties of the regulatory authorities to cooperate with each other and with ACER.
6.   Regulatory authorities, or where appropriate other competent authorities, may consult and cooperate with the relevant authorities of third countries, including Energy Community Contracting Parties, in relation to the operation of natural gas and hydrogen infrastructure to and from third countries with a view to ensuring, as regards the infrastructure concerned, that this Directive is applied consistently in the territory and territorial sea of a Member State.
