Article 75
Unbundling of accounts
1.   Member States shall take the necessary steps to ensure that the accounts of natural gas and hydrogen undertakings are kept in accordance with paragraphs 2 to 5.
2.   Natural gas and hydrogen undertakings, whatever their system of ownership or legal form, shall draw up, submit to audit and publish their annual accounts in accordance with the rules of national law concerning the annual accounts of limited liability companies adopted pursuant to Directive 2013/34/EU.
Undertakings which are not legally obliged to publish their annual accounts shall keep a copy thereof at the disposal of the public at their head office.
3.   Undertakings shall, in their internal accounting, keep separate accounts for each of their transmission, distribution, LNG, hydrogen terminal, natural gas and hydrogen storage and hydrogen transport activities as they would be required to do if the activities in question were carried out by separate undertakings, with a view to avoiding discrimination, cross-subsidisation and distortion of competition. Infrastructure assets of the undertakings shall be allocated to the relevant accounts and regulatory asset bases separately for natural gas, electricity or hydrogen assets and that allocation shall be made transparent. Undertakings shall also keep accounts, which may be consolidated, for other activities not relating to transmission, distribution, LNG, hydrogen terminal, natural gas or hydrogen storage or hydrogen transport activities. Revenue from ownership of the transmission, distribution or hydrogen network shall be specified in the accounts. Where appropriate, undertakings shall keep consolidated accounts for other, non-natural gas and non-hydrogen activities. The internal accounts shall include a balance sheet and a profit and loss account for each activity. The separation of accounts shall be audited in accordance with the rules laid down in paragraph 2 and reported to the regulatory authority concerned.
4.   The audit referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article shall, in particular, verify that the obligation to avoid discrimination and cross-subsidies referred to in paragraph 3 of this Article is respected. Without prejudice to Article 5 of Regulation (EU) 2024/1789, there shall be no cross-subsidisation between natural gas system users and hydrogen network users.
5.   Undertakings shall specify in their internal accounting the rules for the allocation of assets and liabilities, expenditure and income as well as for depreciation, without prejudice to nationally applicable accounting rules, which they follow in drawing up the separate accounts referred to in paragraph 3. Those internal rules may be amended only in exceptional cases. Such amendments shall be notified to the regulatory authority and duly substantiated.
6.   The annual accounts shall indicate in notes any transaction of a certain size conducted with related undertakings.
CHAPTER X

REGULATORY AUTHORITIES

