Article 71
Designation and certification of transmission system operators and hydrogen transmission network operators
1.   Before an undertaking is approved and designated as transmission system operator or hydrogen transmission network operator, it shall be certified in accordance with paragraphs 4, 5 and 6 of this Article and with Article 14 of Regulation (EU) 2024/1789.
2.   Undertakings which have been certified by the regulatory authority as having complied with the requirements of Article 60 or 68, pursuant to the certification procedure, shall be approved and designated as transmission system operators or hydrogen transmission network operators by Member States. The designation of transmission system operators and hydrogen transmission network operators shall be notified to the Commission and published in the Official Journal of the European Union.
3.   Certified undertakings shall notify to the regulatory authority any planned transaction which may require a reassessment of their compliance with the requirements of Article 60 or 68.
4.   The regulatory authorities shall monitor the continuing compliance of certified undertakings with the requirements of Article 60 or 68. They shall open a certification procedure to ensure such compliance:
(a)
upon notification by the certified undertaking pursuant to paragraph 3;
(b)
on their own initiative where they have knowledge that a planned change in rights or influence over certified undertakings or transmission system owners may lead to an infringement of Article 60 or 68 or where they have reason to believe that such an infringement may have occurred; or
(c)
upon a reasoned request from the Commission.
5.   The regulatory authorities shall adopt a decision on the certification of a transmission system operator or a hydrogen transmission network operator within 100 working days from the date of the notification by the transmission system operator or the hydrogen transmission network operator or from the date of the Commission request. After expiry of that period, the certification shall be deemed to be granted. The explicit or tacit decision of the regulatory authority shall become effective only after the conclusion of the procedure set out in paragraph 6.
6.   The explicit or tacit decision on the certification shall be notified without delay to the Commission by the regulatory authority, together with all the relevant information with respect to that decision. The Commission shall act in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 14 of Regulation (EU) 2024/1789.
7.   The regulatory authorities and the Commission may request from transmission system operators, hydrogen transmission network operators and undertakings performing any of the functions of production or supply any information relevant for the fulfilment of their tasks under this Article.
8.   The regulatory authorities and the Commission shall preserve the confidentiality of commercially sensitive information.
