Article 57
Network decommissioning plans for distribution system operators
1.   Member States shall ensure that distribution system operators develop network decommissioning plans where a reduction in natural gas demand requiring the decommissioning of natural gas distribution networks or parts of such networks is expected. Such plans shall be developed in close cooperation with hydrogen distribution network operators, distribution system operators for electricity, and district heating and cooling operators, ensuring effective energy system integration and reflecting the reduced use of natural gas for the heating and cooling of buildings where more energy and cost-efficient alternatives are available. Member States may allow distribution system operators in accordance with this Article and hydrogen distribution network operators in accordance with Article 56 that are active in the same region to develop a joint plan if parts of the natural gas infrastructure are to be repurposed. Member States allowing for one joint plan shall ensure that the plan is sufficiently transparent to clearly identify the specific needs of the natural gas sector and the specific needs of the hydrogen sector addressed by the plan. Where applicable, separate modelling shall be performed for each energy carrier, with separate chapters showing network maps for natural gas and network maps for hydrogen.
Member States in which separate plans for natural gas and hydrogen are developed shall ensure that distribution system operators and hydrogen distribution network operators cooperate closely where decisions need to be made to ensure system-efficiency across energy carriers, such as for repurposing.
2.   The distribution network decommissioning plans shall at least comply with the following principles:
(a)
the plans are based on the heating and cooling plans developed in accordance with Article 25(6) of Directive (EU) 2023/1791 and duly take into account the demand of sectors that are not covered by the heating and cooling plans;
(b)
the plans are based on reasonable assumptions about the evolution of production, injection and supply of natural gas, including biomethane, on the one hand, and the consumption of natural gas in all sectors at distribution level, on the other hand;
(c)
distribution system operators identify required infrastructure adaptations, while demand-side solutions not requiring new infrastructure investments are prioritised, and the plans list infrastructure that is to be decommissioned, also in view of creating transparency with regard to the possible repurposing of such infrastructure for the transport of hydrogen;
(d)
distribution system operators conduct a consultation process open to the relevant stakeholders when developing the plan in order to enable their early and effective participation in the planning process, including the provision and exchange of all relevant information; the results of the consultation and the network decommissioning plan are submitted to the relevant national authority;
(e)
the plans and the outcome of the stakeholder consultation are published on the distribution system operators’ websites and those websites are updated regularly to ensure that the relevant stakeholders are informed sufficiently to allow them to participate in the consultation effectively;
(f)
the plans are updated at least every four years, based on the latest projections for natural gas demand and supply in the relevant region, and shall cover a ten-year period;
(g)
distribution system operators that are active in the same regional area may opt to develop one single joint network decommissioning plan;
(h)
the plans are consistent with the Union-wide network development plan for natural gas referred to in Article 32 of Regulation (EU) 2024/1789 and the national ten-year network development plans developed in accordance with Article 55 of this Directive;
(i)
the plans are consistent with the Member State’s integrated national energy and climate plan, the integrated national energy and climate progress report and the long-term strategy submitted pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2018/1999 and support the climate-neutrality objective set out in Article 2(1) of Regulation (EU) 2021/1119.
3.   Relevant national authorities shall assess whether the distribution network decommissioning plans comply with the principles laid down in paragraph 2. They shall approve or reject the distribution network decommissioning plan and may require amendments to that plan.
4.   The development of the distribution network decommissioning plans shall facilitate the protection of final customers in accordance with Article 13 as well as take into account their rights pursuant to Article 38(6).
5.   Member States may decide not to apply the obligations set out in paragraphs 1 to 4 to distribution system operators that serve fewer than 45 000 connected customers by 4 August 2024. Where distribution system operators are exempted from submitting a distribution network decommissioning plan, they shall inform the regulatory authority of the decommissioning of the distribution networks or parts thereof.
6.   Where parts of the natural gas distribution network may require decommissioning before their originally projected life cycle, the regulatory authority shall establish guidelines for a structural approach to the depreciation of such assets and tariff setting in accordance with Article 78(7). When developing such guidelines, regulatory authorities shall consult the relevant stakeholders, in particular distribution system operators and consumer bodies.
