Article 59
Financing cross-border hydrogen infrastructure
1.   Where Member States apply a system of regulated third-party access to hydrogen transmission networks pursuant to Article 35(1) and where a hydrogen interconnector project is not a project of common interest as referred to in Chapter II of, and point 3 of Annex I to, Regulation (EU) 2022/869 of the European Parliament and of the Council (49), adjacent and affected hydrogen transmission network operators shall bear the costs of the project and may include them within their respective tariff systems, subject to approval by the regulatory authority. If the hydrogen transmission network operators identify a substantial gap between benefits and costs, they may design a project plan, including a request for cross-border cost allocation, and submit it jointly to the regulatory authorities concerned for joint approval.
2.   Where hydrogen transmission network operators submit a project plan as set out in paragraph 1, that project plan and the request for cross-border cost allocation shall be accompanied by a project-specific cost-benefit analysis, taking into account benefits beyond the borders of Member States concerned, and by a business plan evaluating the financial viability of the project, which shall include a financing solution and specify whether the hydrogen transmission network operators involved agree on a substantiated proposal for a cross-border cost allocation.
The regulatory authorities concerned shall, after consulting the hydrogen transmission network operators, take a joint decision on the allocation of investment costs to be borne by each hydrogen transmission network operator for the project.
3.   From 1 January 2033, all hydrogen transmission network operators concerned shall negotiate a system of financial compensation to ensure financing for cross-border hydrogen infrastructure in the event that no tariffs are charged for access to hydrogen transmission networks at interconnection points between Member States pursuant to Article 7(8) of Regulation (EU) 2024/1789. When developing that system, hydrogen transmission network operators shall conduct an extensive consultation process involving all relevant market participants.
4.   The hydrogen transmission network operators concerned shall agree on the system of financial compensation by 31 December 2035 and submit it to the regulatory authorities concerned for their joint approval. If no agreement is reached within that period, the regulatory authorities concerned shall decide jointly within two years. Where the regulatory authorities concerned cannot reach a joint agreement within two years, ACER shall take a decision, following the procedure pursuant to Article 6(10) of Regulation (EU) 2019/942.
5.   The system of financial compensation shall be implemented in line with Article 78(1), point (c).
6.   For the transition to a system of financial compensation, existing capacity contracts shall not be affected by the established financial compensation mechanism.
7.   Further details required to implement the process set out in this Article, including required processes and time frames, process for reviewing and, if necessary, amending the system of financial compensation to allow the taking into account of tariff evolution and the development of the hydrogen networks, shall be set in a network code established pursuant to Article 72 of Regulation (EU) 2024/1789.
CHAPTER IX

UNBUNDLING OF TRANSMISSION SYSTEM OPERATORS AND HYDROGEN TRANSMISSION NETWORK OPERATORS

