Article 18
Smart metering systems in the hydrogen system
1.   Member States shall ensure the deployment of smart metering systems that can accurately measure consumption and provide information on actual time of use, and that are able to transmit and receive data for information, monitoring and control purposes using a form of electronic communication.
2.   Notwithstanding paragraph 1 of this Article, such obligation to deploy shall be subject to a cost-benefit assessment at least for household customers, which shall be undertaken in accordance with the principles laid down in Annex II.
3.   Member States shall ensure the security of the smart metering systems and relevant data communication, and the privacy of final customers, in compliance with relevant Union data protection and privacy law, as well as their interoperability and having regard to the use of appropriate standards.
4.   The Commission shall adopt, by means of implementing acts, interoperability requirements for smart metering and procedures to ensure, for those eligible, access to data coming from smart metering systems. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the advisory procedure referred to in Article 91(2).
5.   Member States that proceed with the deployment of smart metering systems shall ensure that final customers contribute to the associated costs of the deployment in a transparent and non-discriminatory manner, while taking into account the long-term benefits to the whole value chain, including to network operations, when calculating the network charges applicable to, or fees paid by, customers. Member States shall regularly monitor such deployment in their territories to track the delivery of benefits to customers.
6.   Where the deployment of smart metering systems has been negatively assessed as a result of the cost-benefit assessment referred to in paragraph 2, Member States shall ensure that the assessment is revised periodically in response to significant changes in the underlying assumptions and in response to technological and market developments. Member States shall notify to the Commission the outcome of their updated cost-benefit assessment as it becomes available.
