Article 3
Competitive, customer-centred, flexible and non-discriminatory markets for natural gas and hydrogen
1.   Member States shall ensure that all customers are free to purchase natural gas and hydrogen from the supplier of their choice and shall ensure that all customers are free to have more than one supply contract for natural gas or hydrogen at the same time, provided that the required connection and metering points are established.
2.   Member States shall ensure that their national law does not unduly hamper cross-border trade in natural gas and hydrogen, the functioning and emergence of liquid trading for natural gas and hydrogen, consumer participation, investments into, in particular, renewable gas and low-carbon gas, or energy storage between Member States, and shall ensure that prices for natural gas and hydrogen reflect actual demand and supply.
3.   Member States shall ensure that no undue barriers exist within the internal markets for natural gas and hydrogen as regards market entry and exit, trading and operation.
4.   Member States and regulatory authorities shall ensure that energy undertakings are subject to transparent, proportionate and non-discriminatory rules, fees and treatment, in particular with regard to connection to the network, access to wholesale markets, access to data, switching processes and billing regimes and, where applicable, licensing.
5.   Member States shall ensure that market participants from third countries, when operating within the internal markets for natural gas and hydrogen, comply with applicable Union and national law, including that relating to environment and safety.
6.   Member States shall ensure a customer-centred and energy efficient approach in the market for hydrogen. The use of hydrogen shall be targeted for customers in hard-to-decarbonise sectors with a high greenhouse gas abatement potential where no more energy and cost-efficient options are available.
7.   Member States shall ensure that this Directive is implemented in a manner which fosters energy system integration while not unduly discriminating against more energy efficient solutions, such as direct electrification, in line with the energy efficiency first principle.
