Article 60
Unbundling of transmission systems and transmission system operators
1.   Member States shall ensure that:
(a)
each undertaking which owns a transmission system acts as a transmission system operator;
(b)
the same person is entitled neither:
(i)
directly or indirectly to exercise control over an undertaking performing any of the functions of production or supply, and directly or indirectly to exercise control or exercise any right over a transmission system operator or over a transmission system; nor
(ii)
directly or indirectly to exercise control over a transmission system operator or over a transmission system, and directly or indirectly to exercise control or exercise any right over an undertaking performing any of the functions of production or supply;
(c)
the same person is not entitled to appoint members of the supervisory board, the administrative board or bodies legally representing the undertaking, of a transmission system operator or a transmission system, and directly or indirectly to exercise control or exercise any right over an undertaking performing any of the functions of production or supply;
(d)
the same person is not entitled to be a member of the supervisory board, the administrative board or bodies legally representing the undertaking, of both an undertaking performing any of the functions of production or supply and a transmission system operator or a transmission system.
2.   The rights referred to in paragraph 1, points (b) and (c), shall include, in particular:
(a)
the power to exercise voting rights;
(b)
the power to appoint members of the supervisory board, the administrative board or bodies legally representing the undertaking; or
(c)
the holding of a majority share.
3.   For the purpose of paragraph 1, point (b), the term ‘undertaking performing any of the functions of production or supply’ shall be understood as including ‘undertaking performing any of the functions of generation or supply’ within the meaning of Directive (EU) 2019/944, and the terms ‘transmission system operator’ and ‘transmission system’ shall be understood as including ‘transmission system operator’ and ‘transmission system’ within the meaning of that Directive.
4.   The obligation set out in paragraph 1, point (a), of this Article shall be deemed to be fulfilled in a situation where two or more undertakings which own transmission systems have created a joint venture which acts as a transmission system operator in two or more Member States for the transmission systems concerned. No other undertaking may be part of the joint venture, unless it has been approved pursuant to Article 61 as an independent system operator or as an independent transmission operator for the purposes of Section 3.
5.   For the implementation of this Article, where the person referred to in paragraph 1, points (b), (c) and (d), is the Member State or another public body, two separate public bodies exercising control over a transmission system operator or over a transmission system on the one hand, and over an undertaking performing any of the functions of production or supply on the other, shall be deemed not to be the same person.
6.   Member States shall ensure that neither commercially sensitive information referred to in Article 40 held by a transmission system operator which was part of a vertically integrated undertaking, nor the staff of such a transmission system operator, is transferred to undertakings performing any of the functions of production and supply.
7.   Where on 3 September 2009 the transmission system belonged to a vertically integrated undertaking, a Member State may decide not to apply paragraph 1. As regards the part of the transmission system connecting a Member State with a third country between the border of that Member State and the first connection point with that Member State’s network, where on 23 May 2019 the transmission system belonged to a vertically integrated undertaking, a Member State may decide not to apply paragraph 1.
In such case, the Member State concerned shall either:
(a)
designate an independent system operator in accordance with Article 61; or
(b)
comply with the provisions of Section 3.
8.   Where on 3 September 2009 the transmission system belonged to a vertically integrated undertaking and arrangements are in place which guarantee more effective independence of the transmission system operator than the provisions of Section 3, a Member State may decide not to apply paragraph 1 of this Article.
As regards the part of the transmission system connecting a Member State with a third country between the border of that Member State and the first connection point with that Member State’s network, where on 23 May 2019 the transmission system belonged to a vertically integrated undertaking and arrangements are in place which guarantee more effective independence of the transmission system operator than the provisions of Section 3, that Member State may decide not to apply paragraph 1 of this Article.
9.   Before an undertaking is approved and designated as a transmission system operator pursuant to paragraph 8 of this Article, it shall be certified in accordance with the procedures laid down in Article 71(4), (5) and (6) of this Directive and in Article 14 of Regulation (EU) 2024/1789. After that, the Commission shall verify that the arrangements in place clearly guarantee more effective independence of the transmission system operator than the provisions of Section 3.
10.   Vertically integrated undertakings which own a transmission system shall not in any event be prevented from taking steps to comply with paragraph 1.
11.   Undertakings performing any of the functions of production or supply shall not in any event be able to directly or indirectly take control over, or exercise any right over, unbundled transmission system operators in Member States which apply paragraph 1.
