Article 8
Authorisation procedure
1.   In circumstances where an authorisation, such as a licence, permission, concession, consent or approval, is required for the construction or operation of natural gas facilities, hydrogen production facilities and hydrogen system infrastructure, the Member States or any competent authority they designate shall grant authorisations to build or operate such facilities, infrastructure, pipelines or associated equipment on their territory, in accordance with paragraphs 2 to 11. Member States or any competent authority they designate may also grant authorisations on the same basis for the supply of natural gas and hydrogen and for wholesale customers.
2.   Where Member States have a system of authorisation, they shall lay down objective and non-discriminatory criteria and transparent procedures, which shall be met where an undertaking applies for an authorisation to supply natural gas and hydrogen or to construct or operate natural gas facilities, hydrogen production facilities or hydrogen system infrastructure. The criteria and procedures for the granting of authorisations shall be made public. Member States shall ensure that authorisation procedures for such facilities, infrastructure, pipelines or associated equipment take into account the importance of the project for the internal markets for natural gas and hydrogen where appropriate. Member States shall ensure consistency of the system of authorisation for hydrogen system infrastructure with the network development plans for hydrogen transmission and distribution networks adopted pursuant to Articles 55 and 56.
3.   For natural gas suppliers, Member States may assess the financial strength and technical capabilities of applicants as criteria for authorisation. Such criteria shall be fully transparent and non-discriminatory.
4.   Member States shall ensure that any national rules concerning the authorisation procedure referred to in this Article are proportionate, necessary and contribute to the implementation of the general rules for the organisation of the markets for natural gas and hydrogen and infrastructure access, to the energy efficiency first principle, to achieving the Union’s climate and energy targets and to the implementation of Member States’ integrated national energy and climate plans, as well as their long-term strategies adopted pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2018/1999.
5.   The authorisation procedures for the activities referred to in paragraph 1 shall not exceed two years, including all relevant procedures of competent authorities. Where duly justified on the grounds of extraordinary circumstances, that two-year period may be extended by up to one year.
6.   Member States shall assess which national legislative and non-legislative measures are necessary to streamline authorisation procedures, including, without hampering, any procedural steps related to environmental impact assessment procedures and public consultations. Member States shall report to the Commission on the results of such an assessment as part of their integrated national energy and climate plans as referred to in Article 3 of Regulation (EU) 2018/1999, and in accordance with the procedure set out in Articles 7 to 12 of that Regulation, and as part of their integrated national energy and climate progress reports pursuant to Article 17 of that Regulation.
7.   The time limits established in paragraph 5 of this Article shall apply without prejudice to obligations under applicable Union environmental and energy law, including Directive (EU) 2018/2001, to judicial appeals, remedies and other proceedings before a court or tribunal, and to alternative dispute resolution mechanisms, including complaints procedures, non-judicial appeals and remedies, and may be extended for the duration of such procedures.
8.   Member States shall set up or designate one or more contact points. Those contact points shall, upon request by the applicant, and free of charge, guide the applicant through and facilitate the entire authorisation procedure for the activities referred to in paragraph 1 up to the delivery by the responsible authorities at the end of the procedure. The applicant shall not be required to contact more than one contact point for the entire process.
9.   Member States shall ensure that authorisations under national law for the construction and operation of natural gas system infrastructure also apply to hydrogen system infrastructure. This is without prejudice to the right of Member States to revoke those authorisations if the hydrogen infrastructure does not comply with technical safety rules for hydrogen system infrastructure set out in Union or national law.
10.   Member States shall ensure that existing land-use rights for the construction and operation of natural gas pipelines and other network assets shall be also applied to pipelines and other network assets for the transport of hydrogen.
11.   In the event of a transfer of infrastructure ownership within the same undertaking to meet the requirements of Article 69, the authorisations and land-use rights pertaining to that infrastructure shall equally be transferred to the new owner.
12.   Member States shall ensure that the reasons for any refusal to grant an authorisation are objective and non-discriminatory and that they are provided to the applicant. Reasons for such refusals shall be notified to the Commission for information. Member States shall establish a procedure enabling the applicant to appeal against such refusals.
13.   For the development of newly supplied areas and efficient operation generally, and without prejudice to Article 34, Member States may decline to grant a further authorisation to build and operate distribution pipeline systems for natural gas in any particular area, once such pipeline systems have been or are authorised to be built in that area and if existing or proposed capacity is not saturated.
14.   Member States shall decline to grant an authorisation to construct and operate a transmission or a distribution infrastructure for natural gas in areas where the network development plan pursuant to Article 55 provides for the decommissioning of the transmission system or relevant parts thereof or a distribution network decommissioning plan has been approved pursuant to Article 57.
15.   Where an authorisation within the meaning of paragraph 1 of this Article falls within the scope of application of Article 15 and Articles 15b to 17 of Directive (EU) 2018/2001, only those provisions shall apply.
