Article 69
Horizontal unbundling of hydrogen transmission network operators
1.   Where a hydrogen transmission network operator is part of an undertaking active in transmission or distribution of natural gas or electricity, it shall be independent at least in terms of its legal form.
2.   Member States may grant derogations, on the basis of a publicly available positive cost-benefit analysis, from the requirements of paragraph 1 to hydrogen transmission network operators, subject to a positive assessment by the regulatory authority in accordance with paragraph 4.
3.   Derogations granted pursuant to paragraph 2 shall be published and notified to the Commission, accompanied by the assessment concerned referred to in paragraph 4, while preserving the confidentiality of commercially sensitive information.
4.   At the moment of granting a derogation pursuant to paragraph 2, and at least every seven years thereafter, or upon a reasoned request by the Commission, the regulatory authority of the Member State granting the derogation shall publish an assessment of the impact of the derogation on transparency, cross subsidies, network tariffs and cross-border trade. Such an assessment shall include at least the calendar of expected transfers of assets from the natural gas sector to the hydrogen sector.
If the regulatory authority concludes, on the basis of an assessment, that the continued application of the derogation would have a negative impact on transparency, cross-subsidies, network tariffs and cross-border trade, or when the transfer of assets from the natural gas sector to the hydrogen sector has concluded, the Member State shall withdraw the derogation.
5.   By way of derogation from paragraphs 2, 3 and 4, Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania may grant derogations from the requirements of paragraph 1 to hydrogen transmission network operators. Any such derogation shall be notified to the Commission and shall expire by 31 December 2030. After the date of expiration of a derogation granted pursuant to this paragraph, Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania may grant derogations pursuant to paragraphs 2, 3 and 4.
