Article 56
Hydrogen distribution network development plan
1.   Hydrogen distribution network operators shall submit to the regulatory authority every four years a plan presenting the hydrogen network infrastructure they aim to develop. The plan shall be developed in close cooperation with distribution system operators for natural gas and electricity, as well as district heating and cooling operators where applicable, ensuring effective energy system integration and taking the utmost account of their views. Member States may allow hydrogen distribution network operators in accordance with this Article and distribution system operators in accordance with Article 57 that are active in the same region to develop a joint plan.
Member States allowing for one joint plan shall ensure that the plan is sufficiently transparent to clearly identify the specific needs of the natural gas sector and the specific needs of the hydrogen sector addressed by the plan. Separate modelling shall be performed for each energy carrier and with separate chapters showing network maps for natural gas and network maps for hydrogen.
Member States in which separate plans for natural gas and hydrogen are developed shall ensure that distribution system operators and hydrogen distribution network operators cooperate closely where decisions need to be made to ensure system-efficiency across energy carriers, such as for repurposing.
2.   The hydrogen distribution network development plan shall, in particular:
(a)
include information on capacity needs, both in volume and duration, as negotiated between hydrogen distribution network users and hydrogen distribution network operators, on hydrogen supply, and on capacity needs, both in volume and duration, of existing and potential future hard-to-decarbonise end-users taking into account the greenhouse gas abatement potential and the energy and cost-efficiency in relation to other options and the location of those end-users with a view to targeting the use of renewable and low-carbon hydrogen in those sectors;
(b)
take into account the heating and cooling plans established pursuant to Article 25(6) of Directive (EU) 2023/1791 and the demand of sectors that are not covered by the heating and cooling plans, and assess how the principle of energy efficiency first in accordance with Article 27 of that Directive is respected when considering hydrogen distribution network expansion in sectors where more energy efficient alternatives are available;
(c)
include information on the extent to which repurposed natural gas pipelines are to be used for the transport of hydrogen, as well as the extent to which that repurposing is required to fulfil the capacity needs established in accordance with point (a);
(d)
be based on a consultation process that is open to the relevant stakeholders in order to enable their early and effective participation in the planning process, including the provision and exchange of all relevant information;
(e)
be published on the hydrogen distribution network operator’s website with the outcome of the stakeholder consultation and submitted to the regulatory authority, together with the outcome of the stakeholder consultation; that website shall be updated regularly so that the relevant stakeholders are informed sufficiently to allow them to participate in the consultation effectively;
(f)
be in line with the integrated national energy and climate plan and its updates, and with the integrated national energy and climate reports submitted in accordance with Regulation (EU) 2018/1999 and support the climate-neutrality objective set out in Article 2(1) of Regulation (EU) 2021/1119;
(g)
be consistent with the Union-wide network development plan for hydrogen referred to in Article 60 of Regulation (EU) 2024/1789 and the national ten-year network development plans developed in accordance with Article 55 of this Directive.
3.   Hydrogen distribution network operators shall exchange all relevant information required for developing the plan with other hydrogen network operators, including hydrogen network operators in neighbouring Member States if there is a direct connection.
4.   The regulatory authority shall assess whether the hydrogen distribution network development plan complies with paragraph 1 of this Article. The regulatory authority shall examine the plan and may request amendments to the plan in line with the assessment. It shall take into account in that examination the overall energy-economic necessity of the hydrogen network as well as the joint scenario framework developed pursuant to Article 55(2), point (f). With regard to plans submitted in relation to hydrogen networks benefitting from a derogation pursuant to Article 51 or 52, the regulatory authority may abstain from examining the plan and making recommendations for amendments.
5.   The regulatory authority shall take the examination of the hydrogen distribution network development plan into account in its approval of dedicated charges within the meaning of Article 5 of Regulation (EU) 2024/1789.
6.   Until 31 December 2032, and without prejudice to the powers of the regulatory authority to supervise network access rules, Member States may entrust another competent authority with the task of examining the hydrogen distribution network development plan and of making recommendations for amendments to the plan by the hydrogen distribution network operator to ensure consistency with the integrated national energy and climate plans and their updates.
7.   By way of derogation from paragraphs 1 to 5 of this Article, Member States may decide to apply to hydrogen distribution network operators the requirements set out in Article 55 from 4 August 2024.
