Article 64
Independence of the transmission system operator
1.   Without prejudice to the decisions of the Supervisory Body pursuant to Article 66, the transmission system operator shall have:
(a)
effective decision-making rights, independent from the vertically integrated undertaking, with respect to assets necessary to operate, maintain or develop the transmission system;
(b)
the power to raise money on the capital market in particular through borrowing and capital increase.
2.   The transmission system operator shall at all times act so as to ensure it has the resources it needs in order to carry out the activity of transmission properly and efficiently and develop and maintain an efficient, secure and economic transmission system.
3.   Subsidiaries of the vertically integrated undertaking performing functions of production or supply shall not have any direct or indirect shareholding in the transmission system operator. The transmission system operator shall neither have any direct or indirect shareholding in any subsidiary of the vertically integrated undertaking performing functions of production or supply, nor receive dividends or any other financial benefit from that subsidiary.
4.   The overall management structure and the corporate statutes of the transmission system operator shall ensure effective independence of the transmission system operator in compliance with this Section. The vertically integrated undertaking shall not determine, directly or indirectly, the competitive behaviour of the transmission system operator in relation to the day-to-day activities of the transmission system operator and management of the network, or in relation to activities necessary for the preparation of the ten-year network development plan developed pursuant to Article 55.
5.   In fulfilling their tasks listed in Article 39 and Article 63(2) of this Directive, and in complying with Article 6(1), point (a), Article 10(2), (3) and (4), Article 13(1), Article 17(1) and Article 33(6) of Regulation (EU) 2024/1789, transmission system operators shall not discriminate against different persons or entities and shall not restrict, distort or prevent competition in production or supply.
6.   Any commercial and financial relations between the vertically integrated undertaking and the transmission system operator, including loans from the transmission system operator to the vertically integrated undertaking, shall comply with market conditions. The transmission system operator shall keep detailed records of such commercial and financial relations and make them available to the regulatory authority upon request.
7.   The transmission system operator shall submit for approval by the regulatory authority all commercial and financial agreements with the vertically integrated undertaking.
8.   The transmission system operator shall inform the regulatory authority of the financial resources, referred to in Article 63(1), point (d), available for future investment projects or for the replacement of existing assets.
9.   The vertically integrated undertaking shall refrain from any action impeding or prejudicing the transmission system operator from complying with its obligations in this Section and shall not require the transmission system operator to seek permission from the vertically integrated undertaking in fulfilling those obligations.
10.   An undertaking which has been certified by the regulatory authority as being in compliance with the requirements of this Section shall be approved and designated as a transmission system operator by the Member State concerned. The certification procedure in either Article 71 of this Directive and Article 14 of Regulation (EU) 2024/1789 or in Article 72 of this Directive shall apply.
11.   The transmission system operator shall make public detailed information regarding the quality of the natural gas transported in its networks, based on Articles 16 and 17 of Commission Regulation (EU) 2015/703 (51).
