Article 7
Promotion of regional cooperation and integration
1.   Member States as well as the regulatory authorities shall cooperate with each other for the purpose of integrating their national markets at one and more regional levels, towards the creation of regional markets, where Member States or their regulatory authorities so decide, and further towards the creation of a fully liberalised internal market. In particular, Member States or, where Member States have so provided, the regulatory authorities shall promote and facilitate the cooperation of natural gas transmission system operators and hydrogen transmission network operators at a regional level, including on cross-border issues and on the decommissioning of assets, with the aim of ensuring cost-effective decarbonisation in line with the Union’s climate-neutrality objective and creating competitive internal markets for natural gas and hydrogen, foster the consistency of their legal, regulatory and technical framework and facilitate integration of the isolated systems forming natural gas islands that persist in the Union. The geographical areas covered by such regional cooperation shall include cooperation in geographical areas defined in accordance with Article 31(3) of Regulation (EU) 2024/1789. Such cooperation may cover other geographical areas. Where the Commission considers that the rules at Union level are relevant for the regional integration of markets for natural gas and hydrogen, it shall provide appropriate non-binding guidance taking into account the specificities of those markets and the impact on neighbouring markets.
2.   The Agency for the Cooperation of Energy Regulators (ACER) shall cooperate with regulatory authorities and transmission system operators and hydrogen transmission network operators to ensure the compatibility of regulatory frameworks between and within the regions with the aim of creating competitive internal markets for natural gas and hydrogen. Where ACER considers that binding rules on such cooperation are required, it shall make appropriate recommendations.
3.   Where vertically integrated transmission system operators participate in a joint undertaking established for implementing such cooperation, the joint undertaking shall establish and implement a compliance programme which sets out the measures to be taken to ensure that discriminatory and anticompetitive conduct is excluded. That compliance programme shall set out the specific obligations of employees to meet the objective of excluding discriminatory and anticompetitive conduct. It shall be subject to the approval of ACER. Compliance with the programme shall be independently monitored by the compliance officers of the vertically integrated transmission system operators.
