Article 68
Unbundling of hydrogen transmission network operators
1.   Member States shall ensure that from 5 August 2026 hydrogen transmission network operators are unbundled in accordance with the rules for natural gas transmission system operators set out in Article 60.
2.   For the purpose of this Article, of Articles 46 and 60 of this Directive, and of Articles 35 and 43 of Directive (EU) 2019/944, production or supply shall include production and supply of hydrogen, and transmission shall include transport of hydrogen.
3.   A Member State may decide not to apply paragraph 1 of this Article to hydrogen transmission networks belonging to a vertically integrated undertaking. In such case, the Member State concerned shall designate an independent hydrogen transmission network operator unbundled in accordance with the rules on independent system operators for natural gas set out in Article 61. Hydrogen transmission network operators and transmission system operators for natural gas unbundled in accordance with Article 60(1) may act as independent hydrogen transmission network operators, subject to the requirements pursuant to Article 69.
4.   Where a hydrogen transmission network belongs to one or more certified transmission system operators for natural gas or where, on 4 August 2024, a hydrogen transmission network belongs to a vertically integrated undertaking active in hydrogen production or supply, Member States may decide not to apply paragraph 1 of this Article and designate an entity under the sole control of the transmission system operator or the joint control of two or more transmission system operators, or under the sole control of the vertically integrated undertaking active in hydrogen production or supply as an integrated hydrogen transmission network operator unbundled in accordance with the rules on independent transmission operators for natural gas set out in Section 3 of this Chapter.
Notwithstanding the first subparagraph of this paragraph, where a Member State has granted a derogation from the requirements of Article 69 pursuant to paragraph 2 of that Article and a hydrogen transmission network belongs to one or more certified transmission system operators for natural gas unbundled in accordance with the rules on independent transmission operators for natural gas set out in Section 3 of this Chapter, Member States may decide not to apply paragraph 1 of this Article and to designate that entity or an entity under the joint control of two or more transmission system operators as an integrated hydrogen transmission network operator unbundled in accordance with the rules on independent transmission operators for natural gas set out in Section 3 of this Chapter.
Where an undertaking includes a transmission system operator unbundled in accordance with Article 60(1) and an integrated hydrogen transmission network operator, that undertaking may be active in hydrogen production or supply, but not in the production or supply of natural gas or electricity. Where such undertaking engages in hydrogen production or supply, the transmission system operator for natural gas shall comply with the requirements set out in Section 3 of this Chapter, and the undertaking and all parts thereof shall not book or use capacity rights to inject any hydrogen into a transmission or distribution system for natural gas operated by the undertaking.
5.   The rules applicable to transmission system operators set out in Article 72 shall apply to hydrogen transmission network operators.
