Article 32
Access to upstream natural gas pipeline networks
1.   Member States shall take the necessary measures to ensure that natural gas undertakings and eligible customers, wherever they are located, are able to obtain access to upstream pipeline networks, including facilities supplying technical services incidental to such access, in accordance with this Article, except for the parts of such networks and facilities which are used for local production operations at the site of a field where the natural gas is produced. The measures shall be notified to the Commission in accordance with Article 94.
2.   The access referred to in paragraph 1 shall be provided in a manner determined by the Member States in accordance with the relevant legal instruments. Member States shall apply the objectives of fair and open access, achieving a competitive market for natural gas and avoiding any abuse of a dominant position, taking into account security and regularity of supplies, capacity which is or can reasonably be made available, and environmental protection. The following needs may be taken into account:
(a)
the need to refuse access where there is an incompatibility of technical specifications which cannot reasonably be overcome;
(b)
the need to avoid difficulties which cannot reasonably be overcome and could prejudice the efficient, current and planned future production of hydrocarbons, including that from fields of marginal economic viability;
(c)
the need to respect the duly substantiated reasonable needs of the owner or operator of the upstream pipeline network for the transport and processing of natural gas and the interests of all other users of the upstream pipeline network or relevant processing or handling facilities who may be affected; and
(d)
the need to apply their laws and administrative procedures, in conformity with Union law, for the grant of authorisation for production or upstream development.
3.   Member States shall ensure that they have in place dispute-settlement arrangements, including an authority independent of the parties with access to all relevant information, to enable disputes relating to access to upstream pipeline networks to be settled expeditiously, taking into account the needs referred to in paragraph 2 and the number of parties which may be involved in negotiating access to such networks.
4.   In the event of cross-border disputes, the dispute-settlement arrangements for the Member State having jurisdiction over the upstream pipeline network which refuses access shall be applied. Where, in cross-border disputes, more than one Member State covers the network concerned, the Member States concerned shall consult each other with a view to ensuring that this Directive is applied consistently. Where the upstream pipeline network originates from a third country and connects to at least one Member State, the Member States concerned shall consult each other and the Member State where the first entry point to the Member States’ network is located shall consult the third country concerned where the upstream pipeline network originates, with a view to ensuring, as regards the network concerned, that this Directive is applied consistently in the territory of the Member States.
