Article 12
Right to switch and rules on switching-related fees
1.   Customers shall have the right to switch suppliers for natural gas and hydrogen or to switch natural gas and hydrogen market participants. Member States shall ensure that a customer wishing to switch suppliers or market participants, while respecting contractual conditions, is entitled to such a switch within the shortest possible time, and in any event within three weeks from the date of the request by the customer. By 1 January 2026, the technical process of switching supplier or market participant shall take no longer than 24 hours and shall be possible on any working day.
2.   Member States shall ensure that the right to switch supplier or market participant is granted to customers in a non-discriminatory manner in terms of cost, effort and time.
3.   Member States shall ensure that at least household customers, microenterprises and small enterprises are not charged any switching-related fees for natural gas and hydrogen, included where gas supply is tied to or bundled with other services, equipment or products. However, Member States may allow suppliers or market participants to charge their customers contract termination fees where those customers voluntarily terminate fixed-term, fixed-price supply contracts before their maturity, provided that such fees:
(a)
are part of a contract that the customer has voluntarily entered into; and
(b)
are clearly communicated to the customer before the contract is entered into.
Such fees shall be proportionate and shall not exceed the direct economic loss to the supplier or the market participant resulting from the termination of the contract by the customer. In the case of bundled offers, customers shall be able to terminate individual services of a contract. The burden of proving the direct economic loss shall be on the supplier or market participant. The permissibility of contract termination fees shall be monitored by the regulatory authority or by another competent national authority.
4.   Household customers for natural gas and hydrogen shall be entitled to participate in collective switching schemes. Member States shall remove all regulatory or administrative barriers for collective switching and provide a framework that ensures the consumer protection from abusive practices.
5.   Member States shall ensure that information on supplier switching is provided to final customers in a user-friendly format, including through the single points of contact referred to in Article 24.
6.   Member States shall ensure that customers are granted the right to terminate their gas supply contracts at short notice.
