Article 3
Visits to Member States and inspections
1.   In order to perform the tasks entrusted to it and to assist the Commission in fulfilling its duties under the TFEU, and in particular the assessment of the effective implementation of relevant Union law, the Agency shall carry out visits to Member States in accordance with the methodology established by the Administrative Board.
2.   The Agency shall inform the Member State concerned in good time of the planned visit, the names of the authorised officials, and the date on which the visit starts and its expected duration. The Agency officials delegated to carry out such visits shall do so on presentation of a decision in writing from the Executive Director of the Agency specifying the purpose and the aims of their mission.
3.   The Agency shall carry out inspections on behalf of the Commission as required by binding legal acts of the Union regarding organisations recognised by the Union in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 391/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 April 2009 on common rules and standards for ship inspection and survey organisations (*11), and regarding the training and certification of seafarers in third countries in accordance with Directive 2008/106/EC.
4.   At the end of each visit or inspection, the Agency shall draw up a report and send it to the Commission and to the Member State concerned.
5.   Where appropriate, and in any case when a cycle of visits or inspections is concluded, the Agency shall analyse reports from that cycle with a view to identifying horizontal findings and general conclusions on the effectiveness and cost-efficiency of the measures in place. The Agency shall present this analysis to the Commission for further discussion with Member States in order to draw any relevant lessons and facilitate the dissemination of good working practices.

(*1)  
                                                      OJ L 129, 29.4.2004, p. 6."
                        

(*2)  
                                                      OJ L 131, 28.5.2009, p 47."
                        

(*3)  
                                                      OJ L 314, 1.12.2007, p. 9."
                        

(*4)  
                                                      OJ L 131, 28.5.2009, p. 114."
                        

(*5)  
                                                      OJ L 131, 28.5.2009, p. 57."
                        

(*6)  
                                                      OJ L 323, 3.12.2008, p. 33."
                        

(*7)  
                                                      OJ L 255, 30.9.2005, p. 11."
                        

(*8)  
                                                      OJ L 283, 29.10.2010, p. 1."
                        

(*9)  
                                                      OJ L 164, 25.6.2008, p. 19."
                        

(*10)  
                                                      OJ L 389, 30.12.2006, p. 1."
                        

(*11)  
                                          OJ L 131, 28.5.2009, p. 11.’;"
                        
(2)
in Article 4, paragraphs 3 and 4 are replaced by the following:
‘3.   The Administrative Board shall adopt the practical arrangements for the application of paragraphs 1 and 2, including, where appropriate, arrangements regarding consultation with Member States before the publication of information.
4.   The information collected and processed in accordance with this Regulation by the Commission and the Agency shall be subject to Regulation (EC) No 45/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 December 2000 on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data by the Community institutions and bodies and on the free movement of such data (*12) and the Agency shall take the necessary measures to ensure the safe handling and processing of confidential information.

(*12)  
                                       OJ L 8, 12.1.2001, p. 1.’;"
                        
(3)
in Article 5, paragraph 3 is replaced by the following:
‘3.   At the request of the Commission, the Administrative Board may decide, with the agreement of and in cooperation with the Member States concerned and with due regard to budgetary implications, including any contribution the Member States concerned may provide, to establish the regional centres necessary in order to carry out, in the most efficient and effective way, some of the Agency’s tasks. When taking such a decision, the Administrative Board shall define the precise scope of activities of the regional centre while avoiding unnecessary financial costs and enhancing cooperation with existing regional and national networks.’;
(4)
in Article 10, paragraph 2 is amended as follows:
(a)
point (b) is replaced by the following:
‘(b)
adopt the annual report on the Agency’s activities and forward it each year by 15 June to the European Parliament, the Council, the Commission, the Court of Auditors and the Member States.
The Agency shall forward annually to the budgetary authority all information regarding the outcome of the evaluation procedures;’;
(b)
point (c) is replaced by the following:
‘(c)
examine and approve, in the framework of the preparation of the work programme, requests for assistance to the Commission, as referred to in Article 2(2)(d), requests from Member States for technical assistance, as referred to in Article 2(3), and requests for technical assistance, as referred to in Article 2(5) as well as requests for assistance as referred to in Article 2a;
(ca)
examine and adopt a multiannual strategy for the Agency for a period of five years taking the written opinion of the Commission into account;
(cb)
examine and adopt the multiannual staff policy plan of the Agency;
(cc)
consider draft administrative arrangements, as referred to in Article 15(2)(ba);’;
(c)
point (g) is replaced by the following:
‘(g)
establish the methodology for the visits to be carried out pursuant to Article 3. In the event that the Commission expresses, within 15 days from the date of adoption of the methodology, its disagreement, the Administrative Board shall re-examine and adopt it, possibly amended, in second reading either with a two-thirds majority, including the Commission representatives, or by unanimity of the representatives of the Member States;’;
(d)
point (h) is replaced by the following:
‘(h)
perform its duties in relation to the Agency’s budget pursuant to Articles 18, 19 and 21 and monitor and ensure adequate follow-up to the findings and recommendations stemming from various audit reports and evaluations, whether internal or external;’;
(e)
point (i) is replaced by the following:
‘(i)
exercise disciplinary authority over the Executive Director and the Heads of Department referred to in Article 16;’;
(f)
point (l) is replaced by the following:
‘(l)
review the financial execution of the detailed plan referred to in point (k) of this paragraph and the budgetary commitments provided for in Regulation (EC) No 2038/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 December 2006 on multiannual funding for the action of the European Maritime Safety Agency in the field of response to pollution caused by ships (*13);

(*13)  
                                                         OJ L 394, 30.12.2006, p. 1.’;"
                        
(g)
the following point is added:
‘(m)
appoint an observer from amongst its members to follow the selection procedure by the Commission for the appointment of the Executive Director.’;
(5)
Article 11 is amended as follows:
(a)
in paragraph 1, the second subparagraph is replaced by the following:
‘Administrative Board members shall be appointed on the basis of their degree of relevant experience and expertise in the fields referred to in Article 1. The Member States and the Commission shall each strive for a balanced representation between men and women on the Administrative Board.’;
(b)
paragraph 3 is replaced by the following:
‘3.   The duration of the term of office shall be four years. The term of office may be renewed.’;
(6)
in Article 13, paragraph 4 is replaced by the following:
‘4.   When there is a matter of confidentiality or conflict of interest, the Administrative Board may decide to examine specific items of its agenda without the presence of the members concerned. Detailed rules for the application of this provision shall be laid down in the rules of procedure.’;
(7)
Article 15 is amended as follows:
(a)
in paragraph 2, points (a) and (b) are replaced by the following:
‘(a)
he/she shall prepare the multiannual strategy of the Agency and submit it to the Administrative Board after consultation of the Commission at least eight weeks before the relevant Administrative Board meeting, taking into account views and suggestions made by members of the Administrative Board;
(aa)
he/she shall prepare the multiannual staff policy plan of the Agency and submit it to the Administrative Board after consultation of the Commission at least four weeks before the relevant Administrative Board meeting;
(ab)
he/she shall prepare the annual work programme, with an indication of the expected human and financial resources allocated to each activity, and the detailed plan for the Agency’s pollution preparedness and response activities, and submit them to the Administrative Board after consultation of the Commission at least eight weeks before the relevant Board meeting, taking into account views and suggestions made by members of the Administrative Board. He/she shall take the necessary steps for their implementation. He/she shall respond to any requests for assistance from a Member State in accordance with Article 10(2)(c);
(b)
he/she shall decide to carry out the visits and inspections provided for in Article 3, after consultation of the Commission and following the methodology for visits established by the Administrative Board in accordance with Article 10(2)(g);
(ba)
he/she may enter into administrative arrangements with other bodies working in the Agency’s fields of activities provided that the draft arrangement has been submitted for consultation to the Administrative Board and provided that the Administrative Board does not object within four weeks.’;
(b)
in paragraph 2, point (d) is replaced by the following:
‘(d)
he/she shall organise an effective monitoring system in order to be able to compare the Agency’s achievements with its objectives and tasks as laid down in this Regulation. To this end, he/she shall establish, in agreement with the Commission and the Administrative Board, tailored performance indicators allowing for an effective assessment of the results achieved. He/she shall ensure that the Agency’s organisational structure will be regularly adapted to the evolving needs within the available financial and human resources. On this basis the Executive Director shall prepare a draft general report each year and submit it for consideration by the Administrative Board. The report shall include a dedicated section concerning the financial execution of the detailed plan for the Agency’s pollution preparedness and response activities and give an update of the status of all actions funded under that plan. He/she shall establish regular evaluation procedures that meet recognised professional standards;’;
(c)
in paragraph 2, point (g) is deleted;
(d)
paragraph 3 is replaced by the following:
‘3.   The Executive Director shall, as appropriate, report to the European Parliament and the Council on the carrying out of his/her tasks.
In particular, he/she shall present the state of play with regard to the preparation of the multiannual strategy and the annual work programme.’;
(8)
Article 16 is replaced by the following:
‘Article 16
Appointment and dismissal of the Executive Director and the Heads of Department
1.   The Executive Director shall be appointed and dismissed by the Administrative Board. The appointment shall be made for a period of five years on grounds of merit and documented administrative and managerial competence, as well as documented experience in the fields referred to in Article 1 after hearing the opinion of the observer as referred to in Article 10. The Executive Director shall be appointed from a list of at least three candidates proposed by the Commission after an open competition, following publication of the post in the Official Journal of the European Union, and elsewhere, of a call for expression of interest. The candidate selected by the Administrative Board may be invited to make a statement before the competent committee of the European Parliament and answer questions put by its members. The Administrative Board shall deliberate on dismissal at the request of the Commission or of one third of its members. The Administrative Board shall take its decisions on appointment or dismissal by a four-fifths majority of all members with the right to vote.
2.   The Administrative Board, acting on a proposal from the Commission, taking into account the evaluation report may extend once the term of office of the Executive Director for not more than four years. The Administrative Board shall take its decision by a four-fifths majority of all members with the right to vote. The Administrative Board shall inform the European Parliament about its intention to extend the Executive Director’s term of office. Within a month before the extension of his/her term of office, the Executive Director may be invited to make a statement before the competent committee of the European Parliament and answer questions put by its members. If the term of office is not extended, the Executive Director shall remain in office until the appointment of his/her successor.
3.   The Executive Director may be assisted by one or more Heads of Department. If the Executive Director is absent or indisposed, one of the Heads of Department shall take his/her place.
4.   The Heads of Department shall be appointed on grounds of merit and documented administrative and managerial skills, as well as professional competence and experience in the fields referred to in Article 1. The Heads of Department shall be appointed or dismissed by the Executive Director after having received a positive opinion of the Administrative Board.’;
(9)
Article 18 is amended as follows:
(a)
in paragraph 1, point (c) is replaced by the following:
‘(c)
fees and charges for publications, training and/or any other services provided by the Agency.’;
(b)
paragraph 3 is replaced by the following:
‘3.   The Executive Director shall draw up a draft statement of estimates of the Agency’s revenue and expenditure for the following year, on the basis of activity-based budgeting, and shall forward it to the Administrative Board, together with a draft establishment plan.’;
(c)
paragraphs 7 and 8 are replaced by the following:
‘7.   The statement of estimates shall be forwarded by the Commission to the European Parliament and the Council (the “budgetary authority”) together with the draft general budget of the European Union.
8.   On the basis of the statement of estimates, the Commission shall enter in the draft general budget of the European Union the estimates it deems necessary for the establishment plan and the amount of the subsidy to be charged to the general budget, which it shall place before the budgetary authority in accordance with Article 314 TFEU, together with a description of and justification for any difference between the Agency’s statement of estimates and the subsidy to be charged to the general budget.’;
(d)
paragraph 10 is replaced by the following:
‘10.   The budget shall be adopted by the Administrative Board. It shall become final following final adoption of the general budget of the European Union. Where appropriate, it shall be adjusted accordingly, together with the annual work programme.’;
(10)
Article 22 is replaced by the following:
‘Article 22
Evaluation
1.   At regular intervals and at least every five years, the Administrative Board shall commission an independent external evaluation on the implementation of this Regulation. The Commission shall make available to the Agency any information the latter considers relevant to that evaluation.
2.   The evaluation shall assess the impact of this Regulation as well as the utility, relevance, achieved added value and effectiveness of the Agency and its working practices. The evaluation shall take into account the views of stakeholders, at both European and national level. It shall, in particular, address the possible need to modify the Agency’s tasks. The Administrative Board shall issue specific terms of reference in agreement with the Commission, following consultations with the parties involved.
3.   The Administrative Board shall receive the evaluation and issue recommendations regarding changes to this Regulation, the Agency and its working practices to the Commission. Both the evaluation findings and recommendations shall be forwarded by the Commission to the European Parliament and to the Council and shall be made public. An action plan with a timetable shall be included, if appropriate.’;
(11)
the following Article is inserted:
‘Article 22a
Progress report
By 2 March 2018, and taking into account the evaluation report referred to in Article 22, the Commission shall submit a report to the European Parliament and the Council setting out how the Agency has undertaken the additional responsibilities assigned by this Regulation with a view to identifying further efficiency gains and, if necessary, the case for modifying its objectives and tasks.’;
(12)
Article 23 is deleted.
