Article 23
1.   The Agency shall, in collaboration with the Member States, set up, maintain and make public a list of medicinal products that are subject to additional monitoring.
That list shall include the names and active substances of:
(a)
medicinal products authorised in the Union that contain a new active substance which, on 1 January 2011, was not contained in any medicinal product authorised in the Union;
(b)
any biological medicinal product not covered by point (a) that was authorised after 1 January 2011.
2.   At the request of the Commission, following consultation with the Pharmacovigilance Risk Assessment Committee, medicinal products that are authorised pursuant to this Regulation subject to conditions referred to in points (c), (ca), (cb) and (cc) of Article 9(4), or in Articles 10a, Article 14(7) and (8) and in Article 21(2), may also be included in the list.
At the request of a national competent authority, following consultation with the Pharmacovigilance Risk Assessment Committee, medicinal products that are authorised pursuant to Directive 2001/83/EC, subject to the conditions referred to in Articles 21a, 22, 22a and 104a of that Directive, may also be included in the list.
3.   The list shall include an electronic link to the product information and to the summary of the risk management plan.
4.   The Agency shall remove a medicinal product from the list 5 years after the Union reference date referred to in Article 107c(5) of Directive 2001/83/EC.
However, the Commission or the national competent authority, as appropriate, may, following a recommendation of the Pharmacovigilance Risk Assessment Committee, extend that period until such time as they conclude that the conditions referred to in Article 14a and Article 21(2) of this Regulation or referred to in Articles 22b and 104a of Directive 2001/83/EC have been fulfilled.
5.   For medicinal products included in that list, the summary of product characteristics and the package leaflet shall include the statement “This medicinal product is subject to additional monitoring”. That statement shall be preceded by a black symbol which shall be selected by the Commission following a recommendation of the Pharmacovigilance Risk Assessment Committee by 2 January 2012, and shall be followed by an appropriate standardised explanatory sentence.
