Article 72
Controls and enforcement
1.   Controls of traditional specialities guaranteed mean:
(a)
verification that a product designated by a traditional speciality guaranteed has been produced in compliance with the corresponding product specification; and
(b)
verification of the use of traditional specialities guaranteed in the market.
2.   For the purposes of this Chapter, enforcement includes any action that aims to ensure compliance with Articles 68, 69 and 70 of this Regulation.
3.   Competent authorities, delegated bodies and natural persons to which certain official control tasks have been delegated shall comply with the respective requirements laid down in Regulation (EU) 2017/625.
4.   Each operator wishing to participate in any activity subject to one or more obligations provided for in the product specification of a product designated by a traditional speciality guaranteed shall notify the competent authorities, delegated bodies or natural persons referred to in paragraph 6, points (a) and (b).
Member States shall draw up and keep up-to-date a list of operators who perform activities subject to one or more obligations provided for in the product specification of a product designated by a traditional speciality guaranteed entered in the Union register of traditional specialities guaranteed in their territory.
5.   Producers shall be responsible for own controls that ensure compliance with the product specification of products designated by traditional specialities guaranteed before the product is placed on the market.
6.   In addition to own controls referred to in paragraph 5, prior to placing on the market a product designated by a traditional speciality guaranteed and originating in the Union, verification of compliance with the product specification shall be carried out by:
(a)
one or more competent authorities within the meaning of Article 3, point (3), of Regulation (EU) 2017/625; or
(b)
one or more delegated bodies or natural persons to which certain official control tasks have been delegated, as referred to in Title II, Chapter III, of Regulation (EU) 2017/625.
7.   In respect of traditional specialities guaranteed that designate products originating in a third country, the verification of compliance with the product specification before the placing on the market of the product shall be carried out by:
(a)
one or more competent authorities designated by the third country; or
(b)
one or more product certification bodies.
The costs of verification of compliance with the product specification may be borne by the operators which are subject to those controls. Member States may charge a fee to cover their costs of verification of compliance with the product specification.
8.   Member States shall make public the names and addresses of the competent authorities, delegated bodies and natural persons referred to in paragraph 6 for each product designated by a traditional speciality guaranteed and keep that information up-to-date.
9.   The Commission shall make public the names and addresses of the competent authorities and product certification bodies referred to in paragraph 7 and update that information regularly.
10.   The Commission may establish a digital portal where the name and the address of the competent authorities, delegated and product certification bodies and natural persons referred to in paragraphs 6 and 7 are made public.
11.   The Commission shall adopt implementing acts concerning the communication to be made by the third countries to the Commission, including on names and addresses of the competent authorities and product certification bodies. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 88(2).
12.   The Commission may, by means of implementing acts and without applying the procedure referred to in Article 88(2), lay down the means by which the name and address of competent authorities and delegated bodies referred to in this Article are to be made public.
