Article 37
Union symbols, indications and abbreviations
1.   Indications, abbreviations and symbols referring to geographical indications shall not be used other than in connection with products produced in compliance with the relevant product specification. They may also be used for information and educational purposes, provided that such use is not likely to mislead the consumer.
2.   The following Union symbols designed to mark and publicise geographical indications shall be established:
(a)
a symbol identifying protected designations of origin of agricultural products; and
(b)
a symbol identifying protected geographical indications of agricultural products. That symbol may also be used for geographical indications of spirit drinks.
3.   In the case of agricultural products and spirit drinks originating in the Union that are marketed under a geographical indication, the Union symbol associated with it shall appear in the labelling and advertising material. As regards the labelling, the geographical indication shall appear in the same field of vision as the Union symbol.
The labelling requirements laid down in Article 13(1) of Regulation (EU) No 1169/2011 for the presentation of mandatory particulars shall apply to the geographical indication.
4.   By way of derogation from the first subparagraph of paragraph 3, in the case of spirit drinks, Union symbols may be omitted.
5.   Where agricultural products are designated by a geographical indication, an indication of the name of the producer or operator shall appear in the labelling, in the same field of vision as the geographical indication. In that case, the name of the operator shall be understood as the name of the operator responsible for the production stage at which the product to be covered by the geographical indication is obtained, or responsible for carrying out substantial processing of that product.
In the case of spirit drinks designated by a geographical indication, an indication of the name of the producer shall appear in the labelling, in the same field of vision as the geographical indication.
Where packaging or containers have as their largest surface that described in Article 16(2) of Regulation (EU) No 1169/2011, the indication of the name of the producer or operator shall be voluntary.
Agricultural products and spirit drinks that are marketed under a geographical indication, which were labelled before 14 May 2026, may continue to be placed on the market without complying with the obligation to indicate the name of the producer or operator in the same field of vision as the geographical indication, until existing stocks are exhausted.
6.   Where agricultural products or spirit drinks are designated by a geographical indication, the indications ‘protected designation of origin’ or ‘protected geographical indication’ may appear in the labelling and advertising material of agricultural products and the indication ‘geographical indication’ may appear in the labelling and advertising material of spirit drinks, respectively.
The abbreviations ‘PDO’ or ‘PGI’, corresponding to the indications ‘protected designation of origin’ or ‘protected geographical indication’, may appear in the labelling and advertising material of agricultural products designated by a geographical indication.
7.   Indications and abbreviations may be used in the labelling and advertising material of processed products when the geographical indication refers to an ingredient thereof. In that case, the indication or abbreviation shall be placed next to the name of the ingredient that is clearly identified as an ingredient. The Union symbol shall not be placed in association with the name of the food within the meaning of Article 17 of Regulation (EU) No 1169/2011.
8.   Union symbols indicating the protected designation of origin or protected geographical indication and the indications ‘protected designation of origin’, ‘protected geographical indication’ and ‘geographical indication’ and the abbreviations ‘PDO’ or ‘PGI’ as relevant, may appear on the labelling only after the publication of the act of registration of that geographical indication.
9.   The following may also appear in the labelling:
(a)
depictions of the geographical area of origin referred to in the product specification; and
(b)
text, graphics or symbols referring to the Member State and the region in which that geographical area of origin is located provided that such references do not mislead the consumer as to the true identity or origin of the product.
10.   Union symbols associated with geographical indications entered in the Union register of geographical indications designating products originating in third countries, may appear in the product labelling and advertising material, in which case the symbols shall be used in conformity with paragraph 3.
11.   The Commission shall, by means of implementing acts, specify the technical characteristics of the Union symbols for geographical indications as well as the technical rules on their use and the use of the indications and abbreviations on products marketed under a registered geographical indication, including linguistic versions. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 88(2).
