Article 21
Commission decision on the application for registration
1.   Where, on the basis of the information available to the Commission from the examination carried out in accordance with Article 15, the Commission considers that any of the conditions referred to in that Article is not fulfilled, it shall, by means of implementing acts, reject the application for registration. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 88(2).
2.   In the absence of an admissible opposition, the Commission shall, by means of implementing acts and without applying the procedure referred to in Article 88(2), register the geographical indication. The Commission may take into account the notices of comments received in accordance with Article 18.
3.   Where the Commission receives an admissible opposition, it shall, following the procedure referred to in Article 17 and taking into account the results thereof:
(a)
adopt implementing acts registering the geographical indication without applying the procedure referred to in Article 88(2), if an agreement has been reached, after checking that the agreement complies with Union law, and, if necessary, amend the information published in accordance with Article 15(4) provided that such amendments are not substantial; or
(b)
adopt implementing acts deciding on the application for registration, if an agreement has not been reached; those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 88(2).
4.   The implementing acts registering a geographical indication shall provide for any conditions applicable to the registration and for the republication for information of the single document published in accordance with Article 15(4) and modified following the opposition procedure in the case of modifications other than those referred to in Article 17(7) and Article 18(3).
5.   Commission implementing regulations on registration and Commission implementing decisions on rejection shall be published in the Official Journal of the European Union, L series.
