Article 64
Commission decision on the application for registration
1.   Where, on the basis of the information available to the Commission from the examination carried out in accordance with Article 59, the Commission considers that any of the conditions referred to in that Article is not fulfilled, it shall, by means of implementing acts, reject the application for registration. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 88(2).
2.   In the absence of an admissible opposition, the Commission shall, by means of implementing acts and without applying the procedure referred to in Article 88(2), register the traditional speciality guaranteed.
3.   Where the Commission receives an admissible opposition, it shall, following the procedure referred to in Article 61 and taking into account the results thereof:
(a)
adopt implementing acts registering the traditional speciality guaranteed without applying the procedure referred to in Article 88(2), if an agreement has been reached, after checking that the agreement complies with Union law, and, if necessary, amend the information published in accordance with Article 59(4) provided that such amendments are not substantial; or
(b)
adopt implementing acts deciding on the application for registration, if an agreement has not been reached. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 88(2).
4.   The implementing acts on registering a traditional speciality guaranteed shall provide for any conditions applicable to the registration and for the republication for information of the product specification published in accordance with Article 59(4) and modified following the opposition procedure in the case of modifications other than those referred to in Article 61(7).
5.   Commission implementing regulations on registration and Commission implementing decisions on rejection shall be published in the Official Journal of the European Union, L series.
