Article 31
Relationship between geographical indications and trade marks
1.   An application for the registration of a trade mark the use of which would contravene Article 26 shall be rejected if the application for registration of the trade mark is submitted after the date of submission to the Commission of the application for the registration of the geographical indication.
2.   Union trade marks registered in breach of paragraph 1 shall be declared invalid by the EUIPO and national trade marks registered in breach of paragraph 1 shall be declared invalid by the competent national authorities.
3.   A trade mark the use of which contravenes Article 26, but which has been applied for, registered, or established through use in good faith within the territory of the Union, where that possibility is provided for in the relevant legislation, before the date of submission of the application for registration of the geographical indication to the Commission, may continue to be used and renewed notwithstanding the registration of a geographical indication, provided that no grounds for invalidity or revocation of the trade mark exist under Directive (EU) 2015/2436 or Regulation (EU) 2017/1001. In such cases, the use of the geographical indication, once registered, and that of the relevant trade mark shall be permitted.
4.   For the purposes of paragraphs 1 and 3, where geographical indications were registered in the Union without the submission of an application for registration at Union stage, the date of submission to the Commission of the application for registration of the geographical indication shall be the date of the first day of protection.
5.   Without prejudice to Regulation (EU) No 1169/2011, the guarantee or certification marks referred to in Article 28(4) of Directive (EU) 2015/2436 and collective marks referred to in Article 29(3) of that Directive, as well as collective marks as referred to in Chapter VIII of Regulation (EU) 2017/1001 may be used on labels together with the geographical indication.
