Article 25
Cancellation of the registration
1.   The Commission may, on its own initiative or on a duly substantiated request by a Member State, a third country or any natural or legal person having a legitimate interest and established or resident in a third country, by means of implementing acts, cancel the registration of a geographical indication in the following cases:
(a)
where compliance with the requirements for the product specification can no longer be ensured; or
(b)
where no product has been placed on the market under the geographical indication for at least the preceding seven consecutive years.
2.   The Commission may also adopt implementing acts cancelling the registration at the request of the producers of the product marketed under the registered name. Where a recognised producer group exists, that producer group shall be the only one entitled to lodge such a request.
3.   The registration of the name as an intellectual property right other than a geographical indication, in particular as a trade mark, shall be prohibited for one year after the cancellation of the registration of a geographical indication, unless such intellectual property right had existed, or such a trade mark had been registered, before the registration of the geographical indication.
4.   Articles 10, 13 to 17 and 21 shall apply mutatis mutandis to the cancellation procedure.
Oppositions shall be admissible only if they show continued commercial reliance on the registered name by an interested natural or legal person.
5.   Before adopting the implementing acts referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2, the Commission shall consult the authorities of the Member State, the authorities of the third country or, where possible, the third country producer which had originally applied for the registration of the geographical indication concerned, unless the cancellation is directly requested by those original applicants. The consultation period shall be at least one month.
6.   The Commission shall, by means of implementing acts, lay down detailed rules on procedures, the form and presentation of the requests for the cancellation of a registration.
7.   The implementing acts referred to in paragraphs 1, 2 and 6 of this Article shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 88(2).
