Article 27
Use of geographical indications designating a product used as an ingredient in the name of a processed product
1.   Without prejudice to Article 26 and Article 37(7) of this Regulation and to Articles 7 and 17 of Regulation (EU) No 1169/2011, the geographical indication designating a product used as an ingredient in a processed product may be used in the name of that processed product, or in its labelling, or in its advertising material where:
(a)
the processed product does not contain any other product comparable to the ingredient designated by the geographical indication;
(b)
the ingredient designated by the geographical indication is used in sufficient quantities to confer an essential characteristic on the processed product concerned; and
(c)
the percentage of the ingredient designated by the geographical indication in the processed product is indicated in the label.
2.   In addition, producers of a prepacked food, as defined in Article 2(2), point (e), of Regulation (EU) No 1169/2011, containing as an ingredient a product designated by a geographical indication, who want to use that geographical indication in the name of that prepacked food, including in advertising material, shall give a prior written notification to the recognised producer group where such a group exists for that geographical indication. Those producers shall include in that notification the information that demonstrates that the conditions listed in paragraph 1 of this Article are complied with and shall act accordingly. The recognised producer group shall acknowledge receipt of that notification in writing within four months. The producer of prepacked food may start using the geographical indication in the name of the prepacked food following the receipt of that acknowledgment or after the expiry of that time period, whichever occurs first. The recognised producer group may attach to that acknowledgement non-binding information on the use of the geographical indication concerned.
Member States may provide, in line with the Treaties, for additional procedural rules concerning the producers of prepacked food established on their territory.
3.   Without prejudice to paragraph 1, the recognised producer group and the producer of prepacked food may conclude a contractual agreement about the specific technical and visual aspects of how the geographical indication of the ingredient is presented in the name of the prepacked food in labelling, elsewhere than in the list of ingredients, or in advertising material.
4.   This Article shall not apply to spirit drinks.
5.   The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 87 supplementing this Regulation by laying down additional rules on the use of comparable products as ingredients and the criteria of conferring essential characteristics on the processed products referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article.
