Article 9
Aircraft operator claiming of use of SAF
1.   Aircraft operators shall not claim benefits for the use of an identical batch of SAF under more than one greenhouse gas scheme. The emission factor for the use of SAF under the EU Emission Trading System (EU ETS) is established in Annex IV to Directive 2003/87/EC or the implementing acts adopted pursuant to Article 14 of that Directive. For the purpose of allocating allowances under the EU ETS, Directive 2003/87/EC shall apply. For the purpose of allocating allowances reserved for the uplifting of SAF under the EU ETS, Article 3c(6) of Directive 2003/87/EC shall apply.
Together with the report referred to in Article 8, aircraft operators shall provide the Agency with:
(a)
a declaration of the greenhouse gas schemes that they participate in and in which it is possible for them to report SAF;
(b)
a declaration that they have not reported under more than one greenhouse gas scheme identical batches of SAF; and
(c)
information on participation in Union, national or regional financial support schemes that enables aircraft operators to be compensated for the costs of SAF purchased and information on whether the same batch of SAF has received support under more than one financial support scheme.
2.   For the purpose of reporting SAF use under Article 8 of this Regulation, or under a greenhouse gas scheme, aviation fuel suppliers shall provide aircraft operators with relevant, accurate information relating to the reporting period, free of charge, as soon as possible, and in any case not later than 14 February of each reporting year.
3.   The aircraft operator may request the aviation fuel supplier to provide it with the information referred to in paragraph 2 for other reporting obligations, including those under national law. The aviation fuel supplier shall provide that information free of charge. Where the request concerns information relating to a period that has already ended at the time of the request, the aviation fuel supplier shall provide that information within 90 days from the date of that request. Where the request concerns information relating to a reporting period that has not yet ended at the time that the request was made, the aircraft operator shall endeavour to submit its request at least 45 days before the end of that period. The aviation fuel supplier shall provide that information within 45 days from the end of that period.
