Article 6
Obligations of Union airport managing body to facilitate the access to SAF
1.   Union airport managing bodies shall take all necessary measures to facilitate the access of aircraft operators to aviation fuels containing minimum shares of SAF in accordance with this Regulation.
2.   Where aircraft operators report to the competent authority or authorities difficulties in accessing at a given Union airport aviation fuels containing minimum shares of SAF in accordance with this Regulation, the competent authority or authorities shall request the Union airport managing body to provide the information necessary to prove compliance with paragraph 1. The Union airport managing body concerned shall provide the information to the competent authority without undue delay.
3.   The competent authority or authorities shall assess all the information received in accordance with paragraph 2. Where the competent authority or authorities concludes that the Union airport managing body fulfils its obligations under paragraph 1, it shall inform the Commission and the Agency thereof. In cases of non-compliance, the competent authority or authorities shall request the Union airport managing body to identify and take the necessary measures to address the lack of adequate access of aircraft operators to aviation fuels containing minimum shares of SAF without undue delay, and in any case no later than three years after the request of the competent authority pursuant to paragraph 2.
4.   For the purpose of paragraphs 2 and 3, where appropriate, aviation fuel suppliers, fuel handlers, aircraft operators and any other party concerned by the reported difficulties, shall provide, upon request and without undue delay, all the necessary information to the Union airport managing body and cooperate with the Union airport managing body in identifying and taking the necessary measures to address the reported difficulties.
5.   The competent authority or authorities shall transmit without undue delay all the relevant information provided under paragraphs 2 and 3 of this Article to the Agency to enable it to draw up the technical report referred to in Article 13.
