Article 19
Reporting on production, import, export, feedstock use and destruction of the substances listed in Annexes I or II
1.   By 31 March 2015 and every year thereafter, each producer, importer and exporter that produced, imported or exported one metric tonne or 100 tonnes of CO2 equivalent or more of fluorinated greenhouse gases and gases listed in Annex II during the preceding calendar year shall report to the Commission the data specified in Annex VII on each of those substances for that calendar year. This paragraph shall also apply to undertakings receiving quotas pursuant to Article 18(1).
2.   By 31 March 2015 and every year thereafter, each undertaking that destroyed 1 metric tonne or 1 000 tonnes of CO2 equivalent or more of fluorinated greenhouse gases and gases listed in Annex II during the preceding calendar year shall report to the Commission the data specified in Annex VII on each of those substances for that calendar year.
3.   By 31 March 2015 and every year thereafter, each undertaking that used 1 000 tonnes of CO2 equivalent or more of fluorinated greenhouse gases as feedstock during the preceding calendar year shall report to the Commission the data specified in Annex VII on each of those substances for that calendar year.
4.   By 31 March 2015 and every year thereafter, each undertaking that placed 500 tonnes of CO2 equivalent or more of fluorinated greenhouse gases and gases listed in Annex II contained in products or equipment on the market during the preceding calendar year shall report to the Commission the data specified in Annex VII on each of those substances for that calendar year.
5.   Each importer of equipment that place on the market pre-charged equipment where hydrofluorocarbons contained in this equipment have not been placed on the market prior to the charging of the equipment shall submit to the Commission a verification document issued pursuant to Article 14(2).
6.   By 30 June 2015 and every year thereafter, each undertaking which under paragraph 1 reports on the placing on the market 10 000 tonnes of CO2 equivalent or more of hydrofluorocarbons during the preceding calendar year shall, in addition, ensure that the accuracy of the data is verified by an independent auditor. The auditor shall be either:
(a)
accredited pursuant to Directive 2003/87/EC; or
(b)
accredited to verify financial statements in accordance with the legislation of the Member State concerned.
The undertaking shall keep the verification report for at least five years. The verification report shall be made available, on request, to the competent authority of the Member State concerned and to the Commission.
7.   The Commission may, by means of implementing acts, determine the format and means of submitting the reports referred to in this Article.
Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 24.
8.   The Commission shall take appropriate measures to protect the confidentiality of the information submitted to it in accordance with this Article.
