Article 10
Training and certification
1.   Member States shall, on the basis of the minimum requirements referred to in paragraph 5, establish or adapt certification programmes, including evaluation processes. Member States shall ensure that training is available for natural persons carrying out the following tasks:
(a)
installation, servicing, maintenance, repair or decommissioning of the equipment listed in the points (a) to (f) of Article 4(2);
(b)
leak checks of the equipment referred to in points (a) to (e) of Article 4(2), as provided for in Article 4(1);
(c)
recovery of fluorinated greenhouse gases as provided for in Article 8(1).
2.   Member States shall ensure that training programmes for natural persons recovering fluorinated greenhouse gases from air-conditioning equipment in motor vehicles falling within the scope of Directive 2006/40/EC are available, on the basis of the minimum requirements referred to in paragraph 5.
3.   The certification programmes and training provided for in paragraphs 1 and 2 shall cover the following:
(a)
applicable regulations and technical standards;
(b)
emission prevention;
(c)
recovery of fluorinated greenhouse gases;
(d)
safe handling of equipment of the type and size covered by the certificate;
(e)
information on relevant technologies to replace or to reduce the use of fluorinated greenhouse gases and their safe handling.
4.   Certificates under the certification programmes provided for in paragraph 1 shall be subject to the condition that the applicant has successfully completed an evaluation process established in accordance with paragraphs 1, 3 and 5.
5.   The minimum requirements for certification programmes are those laid down in Regulations (EC) No 303/2008 to (EC) No 306/2008 and under paragraph 12. The minimum requirements for training attestations are those laid down in Regulation (EC) No 307/2008 and under paragraph 12. Those minimum requirements shall specify, for each type of equipment referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2, the required practical skills and theoretical knowledge, where appropriate, differentiating between different activities to be covered, as well as the conditions for mutual recognition of certificates and training attestations.
6.   Member States shall establish or adapt certification programmes on the basis of the minimum requirements referred to in paragraph 5 for undertakings carrying out installation, servicing, maintenance, repair or decommissioning of the equipment listed in points (a) to (d) of Article 4(2) for other parties.
7.   Existing certificates and training attestations issued in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 842/2006 shall remain valid, in accordance with the conditions under which they were originally issued.
8.   Member States shall ensure that all natural persons holding certificates under certification programmes provided for in paragraphs 1 and 7 have access to information regarding each of the following:
(a)
technologies referred to point (e) of paragraph 3; and
(b)
existing regulatory requirements for working with equipment containing alternative refrigerants to fluorinated greenhouse gases.
9.   Member States shall ensure the availability of training for natural persons who wish to update their knowledge in relation to the matters referred to in paragraph 3.
10.   By 1 January 2017 Member States shall notify the Commission of certification and training programmes.
Member States shall recognise certificates and training attestations issued in another Member State in accordance with this Article. They shall not restrict the freedom to provide services or the freedom of establishment because a certificate was issued in another Member State.
11.   Any undertaking which assigns a task referred to in paragraph 1 to another undertaking shall take reasonable steps to ascertain that the latter holds the necessary certificates for the required tasks pursuant to this Article.
12.   In the event that it appears necessary for the purposes of the application of this Article, to provide for a more harmonised approach to training and certification, the Commission shall, by means of implementing acts, adapt and update the minimum requirements as to the skills and knowledge to be covered, specify the modalities of the certification or attestation and the conditions for mutual recognition and repeal acts adopted pursuant to Article 5(1) of Regulation (EC) No 842/2006. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 24. When exercising the power conferred on it by this paragraph, the Commission shall take into account relevant existing qualification or certification schemes.
13.   The Commission may, by means of implementing acts, determine the format of the notification referred to in paragraph 10 of this Article and may repeal acts adopted pursuant to Article 5(5) of Regulation (EC) No 842/2006. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 24.
14.   Where the obligations under this Article relating to the provision of certification and training would impose disproportionate burdens on a Member State because of the small size of its population and the consequent lack of demand for such training and certification, compliance may be achieved through the recognition of certificates issued in other Member States.
Member States applying this paragraph shall inform the Commission who shall inform other Member States.
15.   Nothing in this Article shall prevent Member States from setting up further certification and training programmes in respect of equipment other than that referred to in paragraph 1.
