Article 11
Restrictions on the placing on the market
1.   The placing on the market of products and equipment listed in Annex III, with an exemption for military equipment, shall be prohibited from the date specified in that Annex, differentiating, where applicable, according to the type or global warming potential of the fluorinated greenhouse gas contained.
2.   The prohibition set out in paragraph 1 shall not apply to equipment for which it has been established in ecodesign requirements adopted under Directive 2009/125/EC that due to higher energy efficiency during its operation, its lifecycle CO2 equivalent emissions would be lower than those of equivalent equipment which meets relevant ecodesign requirements and does not contain hydrofluorocarbons.
3.   Following a substantiated request by a competent authority of a Member State and taking into account the objectives of this Regulation, the Commission may, exceptionally, by means of implementing acts, authorise an exemption for up to four years to allow the placing on the market of products and equipment listed in Annex III containing, or whose functioning relies upon, fluorinated greenhouse gases, where it is demonstrated that:
(a)
for a specific product or a piece of equipment, or for a specific category of products or equipment, alternatives are not available, or cannot be used for technical or safety reasons; or
(b)
the use of technically feasible and safe alternatives would entail disproportionate costs.
Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 24.
4.   For the purposes of carrying out the installation, servicing, maintenance or repair of the equipment that contains fluorinated greenhouse gases or whose functioning relies upon those gases for which certification or attestation is required under Article 10, fluorinated greenhouse gases shall only be sold to and purchased by undertakings that hold the relevant certificates or attestations in accordance with Article 10 or undertakings that employ persons holding a certificate or a training attestation in accordance with Article 10(2) and (5). This paragraph shall not prevent non-certified undertakings, who do not carry out the activities referred to in the first sentence of this paragraph, from collecting, transporting or delivering fluorinated greenhouse gases.
5.   Non-hermetically sealed equipment charged with fluorinated greenhouse gases shall only be sold to the end user where evidence is provided that the installation is to be carried out by an undertaking certified in accordance with Article 10.
6.   The Commission shall collect, on the basis of available data from Member States, information on national codes, standards or legislation of Member States with respect to replacement technologies using alternatives to fluorinated greenhouse gases in refrigeration, air-conditioning and heat pump equipment and in foams.
The Commission shall publish a synthesis report on the information collected under the first subparagraph by 1 January 2017.
