Article 21
Review
1.   The Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 22 concerning the updating of Annexes I, II and IV on the basis of new Assessment Reports adopted by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change or new reports of the Scientific Assessment Panel (SAP) of the Montreal Protocol on the global warming potential of the listed substances.
2.   On the basis of information on the placing on the market of the gases listed in Annexes I and II, reported in accordance with Article 19, and on emissions of fluorinated greenhouse gases made available in accordance with Article 20 and on the basis of any relevant information received from Member States, the Commission shall monitor the application and effects of this Regulation.
No later than 31 December 2020, the Commission shall publish a report on the availability of hydrofluorocarbons on the Union market.
No later than 31 December 2022, it shall publish a comprehensive report on the effects of this Regulation, including in particular:
(a)
a forecast of the continued demand for hydrofluorocarbons up to and beyond 2030;
(b)
an assessment of the need for further action by the Union and its Member States in light of existing and new international commitments regarding the reduction of fluorinated greenhouse gas emissions;
(c)
an overview of European and international standards, national safety legislation and building codes in Member States in relation to the transition to alternative refrigerants;
(d)
a review of the availability of technically feasible and cost-effective alternatives to products and equipment containing fluorinated greenhouse gases for products and equipment not listed in Annex III, taking into account energy efficiency.
3.   No later than 1 July 2017, the Commission shall publish a report assessing the prohibition pursuant to point 13 of Annex III, considering in particular, the availability of cost-effective, technically feasible, energy-efficient and reliable alternatives to multipack centralised refrigeration systems referred to in that provision. In light of that report, the Commission shall submit, if appropriate, a legislative proposal to the European Parliament and to the Council with a view to amending the provision pursuant to point 13 of Annex III.
4.   No later than 1 July 2020, the Commission shall publish a report assessing whether cost-effective, technically feasible, energy-efficient and reliable alternatives exist, which make the replacement of fluorinated greenhouse gases possible in new medium-voltage secondary switchgear and new small single split air-conditioning systems and shall submit, if appropriate, a legislative proposal to the European Parliament and to the Council to amend the list set out in Annex III.
5.   No later than 1 July 2017, the Commission shall publish a report assessing the quota allocation method, including the impact of allocating quotas for free, and the costs of implementing this Regulation in Member States and of a possible international agreement on hydrofluorocarbons, if applicable. In light of that report the Commission shall submit, if appropriate, a legislative proposal to the European Parliament and to the Council with a view to:
(a)
amending the quota allocation method;
(b)
establishing an appropriate method of distributing any possible revenues.
6.   No later than 1 January 2017, the Commission shall publish a report examining Union legislation with respect to the training of natural persons for the safe handling of alternative refrigerants to replace or reduce the use of fluorinated greenhouse gases and shall submit, if appropriate, a legislative proposal to the European Parliament and to the Council to amend the relevant Union legislation.
