Article 14
Pre-charging of equipment with hydrofluorocarbons
1.   From 1 January 2017 refrigeration, air conditioning and heat pump equipment charged with hydrofluorocarbons shall not be placed on the market unless hydrofluorocarbons charged into the equipment are accounted for within the quota system referred to in Chapter IV.
2.   When placing pre-charged equipment as referred to in paragraph 1 on the market, manufacturers and importers of equipment shall ensure that compliance with paragraph 1 is fully documented and shall draw up a declaration of conformity in this respect.
From 1 January 2018, where hydrofluorocarbons contained in the equipment have not been placed on the market prior to the charging of the equipment, importers of that equipment shall ensure that by 31 March every year the accuracy of the documentation and declaration of conformity is verified, for the preceding calendar year, by an independent auditor. The auditor shall be either:
(a)
accredited pursuant to Directive 2003/87/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (21); or
(b)
accredited to verify financial statements in accordance with the legislation of the Member State concerned.
Manufacturers and importers of equipment referred to in paragraph 1 shall keep the documentation and declaration of conformity for a period of at least five years after the placing on the market of that equipment. Importers of equipment placing on the market pre-charged equipment where hydrofluorocarbons contained in that equipment have not been placed on the market prior to the charging of the equipment shall ensure they are registered pursuant to point (e) of Article 17(1).
3.   By drawing up the declaration of conformity, manufacturers and importers of equipment referred to in paragraph 1 shall assume responsibility for compliance with paragraphs 1 and 2.
4.   The Commission shall, by means of implementing acts, determine the detailed arrangements relating to the declaration of conformity and the verification by the independent auditor referred to in the second subparagraph of paragraph 2 of this Article. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 24.
