Article 16
Allocation of quotas for placing hydrofluorocarbons on the market
1.   By 31 October 2014 the Commission shall, by means of implementing acts, determine for each producer or importer, having reported data under Article 6 of Regulation (EC) No 842/2006, a reference value based on the annual average of the quantities of hydrofluorocarbons the producer or importer reported to have placed on the market from 2009 to 2012. The reference values shall be calculated in accordance with Annex V to this Regulation.
Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 24.
2.   Producers and importers that have not reported placing on the market hydrofluorocarbons under Article 6 of Regulation (EC) No 842/2006 for the reference period referred to in paragraph 1 may declare their intention to place hydrofluorocarbons on the market in the following year.
The declaration shall be addressed to the Commission, specifying the types of hydrofluorocarbons and the quantities that are expected to be placed on the market.
The Commission shall issue a notice of the time-limit for submitting those declarations. Before submitting a declaration pursuant to paragraphs 2 and 4 of this Article, undertakings shall register in the registry provided for in Article 17.
3.   By 31 October 2017 and every three years thereafter, the Commission shall recalculate the reference values for the producers and importers referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article on the basis of the annual average of the quantities of hydrofluorocarbons lawfully placed on the market from 1 January 2015 as reported under Article 19 for the years available. The Commission shall determine those reference values by means of implementing acts.
Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 24.
4.   Producers and importers for which reference values have been determined may declare additional anticipated quantities following the procedure set out in paragraph 2.
5.   The Commission shall allocate quotas for placing hydrofluorocarbons on the market for each producer and importer for each year beginning with the year 2015, applying the allocation mechanism laid down in Annex VI.
Quotas shall only be allocated to producers or importers which are established within the Union, or which have mandated an only representative established within the Union for the purpose of compliance with the requirements of this Regulation. The only representative may be the same as the one mandated pursuant to Article 8 of Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council (22).
The only representative shall comply with all obligations of producers and importers under this Regulation.
