Article 1
Amendments to Directive 2003/87/EC
Directive 2003/87/EC is amended as follows:
(1)
Throughout the Directive, the term ‘Community scheme’ is replaced by ‘EU ETS’ and any necessary grammatical changes are made.
(2)
Throughout the Directive, except in the cases referred to in point (1) of this Article, in Article 26 of the Directive and in point (5) of Part A of Annex V to the Directive, the word ‘scheme’ is replaced by ‘system’ and any necessary grammatical changes are made.
(3)
Throughout the Directive, except in the cases referred to in point (1) of this Article and in Article 26 of the Directive, the word ‘Community’ is replaced by ‘Union’ and any necessary grammatical changes are made.
(4)
Throughout the Directive, the words ‘regulatory procedure referred to in Article 23(2)’ are replaced by ‘examination procedure referred to in Article 22a(2)’.
(5)
In the first subparagraph of Article 3c(2) and in Article 10(1a), the reference to ‘Article 13(1)’ is replaced by a reference to ‘Article 13’.
(6)
In Article 3g, in point (d) of the first paragraph of Article 5, in point (c) of Article 6(2), in the second subparagraph of Article 10a(2), in Article 14(2), (3) and (4), in Article 19(1) and (4), in the first subparagraph of Article 24(3) and in Article 29a(4), the word ‘regulation’ is replaced by ‘acts’ and any necessary grammatical changes are made.
(7)
In Article 3, point (h) is replaced by the following:
‘(h)
(8)
In Article 3d, paragraph 3 is replaced by the following:
‘3.   The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 23 to supplement this Directive concerning the detailed arrangements for the auctioning by Member States of aviation allowances in accordance with paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article or with Article 3f(8). The number of allowances to be auctioned in each period by each Member State shall be proportionate to its share of the total attributed aviation emissions for all Member States for the reference year reported pursuant to Article 14(3) and verified pursuant to Article 15. For the period referred to in Article 3c(1), the reference year shall be 2010, and for each subsequent period referred to in Article 3c, the reference year shall be the calendar year ending 24 months before the start of the period to which the auction relates. The delegated acts shall ensure that the principles set out in the first subparagraph of Article 10(4) are respected.’.
(9)
In Article 3f, paragraph 9 is deleted.
(10)
In Article 6(1), the third subparagraph is deleted.
(11)
Article 8 is replaced by the following:
‘Article 8
Coordination with Directive 2010/75/EU
Member States shall take the necessary measures to ensure that, where installations carry out activities that are included in Annex I to Directive 2010/75/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council (*1), the conditions and procedure for the issue of a greenhouse gas emissions permit are coordinated with those for the issue of a permit provided for in that Directive. The requirements laid down in Articles 5, 6 and 7 of this Directive may be integrated into the procedures provided for in Directive 2010/75/EU.

(*1)  Directive 2010/75/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 November 2010 on industrial emissions (integrated pollution prevention and control) (OJ L 334, 17.12.2010, p. 17).’."
                        
(12)
In Article 9, the second and third paragraphs are replaced by the following:
‘Starting in 2021, the linear factor shall be 2,2 %.’.
(13)
Article 10 is amended as follows:
(a)
paragraph 1 is replaced by the following:
‘1.   From 2019 onwards, Member States shall auction all allowances that are not allocated free of charge in accordance with Articles 10a and 10c of this Directive and that are not placed in the market stability reserve established by Decision (EU) 2015/1814 of the European Parliament and of the Council (*2) (the “market stability reserve”) or cancelled in accordance with Article 12(4) of this Directive.
From 2021 onwards, and without prejudice to a possible reduction pursuant to Article 10a(5a), the share of allowances to be auctioned shall be 57 %.
2 % of the total quantity of allowances between 2021 and 2030 shall be auctioned to establish a fund to improve energy efficiency and modernise the energy systems of certain Member States as set out in Article 10d (“the Modernisation Fund”).
The total remaining quantity of allowances to be auctioned by Member States shall be distributed in accordance with paragraph 2.

(*2)  Decision (EU) 2015/1814 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 6 October 2015 concerning the establishment and operation of a market stability reserve for the Union greenhouse gas emission trading scheme and amending Directive 2003/87/EC (OJ L 264, 9.10.2015, p. 1).’;"
                        
(b)
paragraph 2 is amended as follows:
(i)
in point (a), ‘88 %’ is replaced by ‘90 %’;
(ii)
point (b) is replaced by the following:
‘(b)
(iii)
point (c) is deleted;
(iv)
the third subparagraph is replaced by the following:
‘If necessary, the percentages referred to in point (b) shall be adapted in a proportional manner to ensure that the distribution is 10 %.’;
(c)
paragraph 3 is amended as follows:
(i)
point (b) is replaced by the following:
‘(b)
(ii)
point (h) is replaced by the following:
‘(h)
(iii)
the following points are added:
‘(j)
to finance climate actions in vulnerable third countries, including the adaptation to the impacts of climate change;
(k)
to promote skill formation and reallocation of labour in order to contribute to a just transition to a low carbon economy, in particular in regions most affected by the transition of jobs, in close coordination with the social partners.’;
(d)
in paragraph 4, the first, second and third subparagraphs are replaced by the following:
‘4.   The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 23 to supplement this Directive concerning the timing, administration and other aspects of auctioning, in order to ensure that it is conducted in an open, transparent, harmonised and non-discriminatory manner. To that end, the process shall be predictable, in particular as regards the timing and sequencing of auctions and the estimated volumes of allowances to be made available.
Those delegated acts shall ensure that auctions are designed to ensure that:
(a)
operators, and in particular any small and medium-sized enterprises covered by the EU ETS, have full, fair and equitable access;
(b)
all participants have access to the same information at the same time and that participants do not undermine the operation of the auctions;
(c)
the organisation of, and participation in, the auctions is cost-efficient and undue administrative costs are avoided; and
(d)
access to allowances is granted to small emitters.’;
(e)
in paragraph 5, the second sentence is replaced by the following:
‘Each year, it shall submit a report to the European Parliament and to the Council on the functioning of the carbon market and on other relevant climate and energy policies, including the operation of the auctions, liquidity and the volumes traded, and summarising the information provided by Member States on the financial measures referred to in Article 10a(6).’.
(14)
Article 10a is amended as follows:
(a)
in paragraph 1, the first and second subparagraphs are replaced by the following:
‘1.   The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 23 to supplement this Directive concerning the Union-wide and fully harmonised rules for the allocation of allowances referred to in paragraphs 4, 5, 7 and 19 of this Article.’;
(b)
in paragraph 2, the following subparagraphs are added:

                                             ‘The Commission shall adopt implementing acts for the purpose of determining the revised benchmark values for free allocation. Those acts shall be in accordance with the delegated acts adopted pursuant to paragraph 1 of this Article and shall comply with the following:
(a)
For the period from 2021 to 2025, the benchmark values shall be determined on the basis of information submitted pursuant to Article 11 for the years 2016 and 2017. On the basis of a comparison of those benchmark values with the benchmark values contained in Commission Decision 2011/278/EU (*3), as adopted on 27 April 2011, the Commission shall determine the annual reduction rate for each benchmark, and shall apply it to the benchmark values applicable in the period from 2013 to 2020 in respect of each year between 2008 and 2023 to determine the benchmark values for the period from 2021 to 2025.
(b)
Where the annual reduction rate exceeds 1,6 % or is below 0,2 %, the benchmark values for the period from 2021 to 2025 shall be the benchmark values applicable in the period from 2013 to 2020 reduced by whichever of those two percentage rates is relevant, in respect of each year between 2008 and 2023.
(c)
For the period from 2026 to 2030, the benchmark values shall be determined in the same manner as set out in points (a) and (b) on the basis of information submitted pursuant to Article 11 for the years 2021 and 2022 and on the basis of applying the annual reduction rate in respect of each year between 2008 and 2028.
By way of derogation regarding the benchmark values for aromatics, hydrogen and syngas, these benchmark values shall be adjusted by the same percentage as the refineries benchmarks in order to preserve a level playing field for producers of those products.
The implementing acts referred to in the third subparagraph shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 22a(2).
In order to promote efficient energy recovery from waste gases, for the period referred to in point (b) of the third subparagraph, the benchmark value for hot metal, which predominantly relates to waste gases, shall be updated with an annual reduction rate of 0,2 %.

(*3)  Commission Decision 2011/278/EU of 27 April 2011 determining transitional Union-wide rules for harmonised free allocation of emission allowances pursuant to Article 10a of Directive 2003/87/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (OJ L 130, 17.5.2011, p. 1).’;"
                        
(c)
paragraph 4 is replaced by the following:
‘4.   Free allocation shall be given to district heating as well as to high efficiency cogeneration, as defined by Directive 2012/27/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council (*4), for economically justifiable demand, in respect of the production of heating or cooling. In each year subsequent to 2013, the total allocation to such installations in respect of the production of that heat shall be adjusted by the linear factor referred to in Article 9 of this Directive, except for any year in which those allocations are adjusted in a uniform manner pursuant to paragraph 5 of this Article.

(*4)  Directive 2012/27/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 October 2012 on energy efficiency, amending Directives 2009/125/EC and 2010/30/EU and repealing Directives 2004/8/EC and 2006/32/EC (OJ L 315, 14.11.2012, p. 1).’;"
                        
(d)
paragraph 5 is replaced by the following:
‘5.   In order to respect the auctioning share set out in Article 10, for every year in which the sum of free allocations does not reach the maximum amount that respects the auctioning share, the remaining allowances up to that amount shall be used to prevent or limit reduction of free allocations to respect the auctioning share in later years. Where, nonetheless, the maximum amount is reached, free allocations shall be adjusted accordingly. Any such adjustment shall be done in a uniform manner.’;
(e)
the following paragraphs are inserted:
‘5a.   By way of derogation from paragraph 5, an additional amount of up to 3 % of the total quantity of allowances shall, to the extent necessary, be used to increase the maximum amount available under paragraph 5.
5b.   Where less than 3 % of the total quantity of allowances is needed to increase the maximum amount available under paragraph 5:
—
a maximum of 50 million allowances shall be used to increase the amount of allowances available to support innovation in accordance with Article 10a(8); and
—
a maximum of 0,5 % of the total quantity of allowances shall be used to increase the amount of allowances available to modernise the energy systems of certain Member States in accordance with Article 10d.’;
(f)
paragraph 6 is replaced by the following:
‘6.   Member States should adopt financial measures in accordance with the second and fourth subparagraphs in favour of sectors or subsectors which are exposed to a genuine risk of carbon leakage due to significant indirect costs that are actually incurred from greenhouse gas emission costs passed on in electricity prices, provided that such financial measures are in accordance with State aid rules, and in particular do not cause undue distortions of competition in the internal market. Where the amount available for such financial measures exceeds 25 % of the revenues generated from the auctioning of allowances, the Member State concerned shall set out the reasons for exceeding that amount.
Member States shall also seek to use no more than 25 % of the revenues generated from the auctioning of allowances for the financial measures referred to in the first subparagraph. Within three months of the end of each year, Member States that have such financial measures in place shall make available to the public, in an easily accessible form, the total amount of compensation provided per benefitting sector and subsector. As from 2018, in any year in which a Member State uses more than 25 % of the revenues generated from the auctioning of allowances for such purposes, it shall publish a report setting out the reasons for exceeding that amount. The report shall include relevant information on electricity prices for large industrial consumers benefiting from such financial measures, without prejudice to requirements regarding the protection of confidential information. The report shall also include information on whether due consideration has been given to other measures to sustainably lower indirect carbon costs in the medium to long term.
The Commission shall include in the report provided for in Article 10(5), inter alia, an assessment of the effects of such financial measures on the internal market and, where appropriate, recommend any measures that may be necessary pursuant to that assessment.
Those measures shall be such as to ensure that there is adequate protection against the risk of carbon leakage, based on ex-ante benchmarks for the indirect emissions of CO2 per unit of production. Those ex-ante benchmarks shall be calculated for a given sector or subsector as the product of the electricity consumption per unit of production corresponding to the most efficient available technologies and of the CO2 emissions of the relevant European electricity production mix.’;
(g)
paragraph 7 is amended as follows:
(i)
the first subparagraph is replaced by the following:
‘Allowances from the maximum amount referred to in paragraph 5 of this Article which were not allocated for free by 2020 shall be set aside for new entrants, together with 200 million allowances placed in the market stability reserve pursuant to Article 1(3) of Decision (EU) 2015/1814. Of the allowances set aside, up to 200 million shall be returned to the market stability reserve at the end of the period from 2021 to 2030 if not allocated for that period.
From 2021, allowances that pursuant to paragraphs 19 and 20 are not allocated to installations shall be added to the amount of allowances set aside in accordance with the first sentence of the first subparagraph of this paragraph.’;
(ii)
the fourth and fifth subparagraphs are deleted.
(h)
in paragraph 8, the first, second and third subparagraphs are replaced by the following:
‘325 million allowances from the quantity which could otherwise be allocated for free pursuant to this Article, and 75 million allowances from the quantity which could otherwise be auctioned pursuant to Article 10, shall be made available to support innovation in low-carbon technologies and processes in sectors listed in Annex I, including environmentally safe carbon capture and utilisation (“CCU”) that contributes substantially to mitigating climate change, as well as products substituting carbon intensive ones produced in sectors listed in Annex I, and to help stimulate the construction and operation of projects that aim at the environmentally safe capture and geological storage (“CCS”) of CO2, as well as of innovative renewable energy and energy storage technologies; in geographically balanced locations within the territory of the Union (the “innovation fund”). Projects in all Member States, including small-scale projects, shall be eligible.
In addition, 50 million unallocated allowances from the market stability reserve shall supplement any remaining revenues from the 300 million allowances available in the period from 2013 to 2020 under Commission Decision 2010/670/EU (*5), and shall be used in a timely manner for innovation support as referred to in the first subparagraph.
Projects shall be selected on the basis of objective and transparent criteria, taking into account, where relevant, the extent to which projects contribute to achieving emission reductions well below the benchmarks referred to in paragraph 2. Projects shall have the potential for widespread application or to significantly lower the costs of transitioning towards a low-carbon economy in the sectors concerned. Projects involving CCU shall deliver a net reduction in emissions and ensure avoidance or permanent storage of CO2. Technologies receiving support shall not yet be commercially available but shall represent breakthrough solutions or be sufficiently mature to be ready for demonstration at pre-commercial scale. Up to 60 % of the relevant costs of projects may be supported, out of which up to 40 % need not be dependent on verified avoidance of greenhouse gas emissions, provided that pre-determined milestones, taking into account the technology deployed, are attained.
The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 23 to supplement this Directive concerning rules on the operation of the innovation fund, including the selection procedure and criteria.

(*5)  Commission Decision 2010/670/EU of 3 November 2010 laying down criteria and measures for the financing of commercial demonstration projects that aim at the environmentally safe capture and geological storage of CO2 as well as demonstration projects of innovative renewable energy technologies under the scheme for greenhouse gas emission allowance trading within the Community established by Directive 2003/87/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (OJ L 290, 6.11.2010, p. 39).’;"
                        
(i)
paragraph 9 is replaced by the following:
‘9.   Greece, which had a gross domestic product (GDP) per capita at market prices below 60 % of the Union average in 2014, may claim, prior to the application of paragraph 7 of this Article, up to 25 million allowances from the maximum amount referred to in paragraph 5 of this Article which are not allocated for free by 31 December 2020, for the co-financing of up to 60 % of the decarbonisation of the electricity supply of islands within its territory. Article 10d(3) shall apply mutatis mutandis to such allowances. Allowances may be claimed where, due to restricted access to the international debt markets, a project aiming at the decarbonisation of the electricity supply of Greece's islands could otherwise not be realised and where the European Investment Bank (EIB) confirms the financial viability and socio-economic benefits of the project.’;
(j)
paragraph 10 is deleted;
(k)
in paragraph 11, the wording ‘, with a view to reaching no free allocation in 2027’ is deleted;
(l)
paragraphs 12 to 18 are deleted;
(m)
paragraph 20 is replaced by the following:
‘20.   The level of free allocations given to installations whose operations have increased or decreased, as assessed on the basis of a rolling average of two years, by more than 15 % compared to the level initially used to determine the free allocation for the relevant period referred to in Article 11(1) shall, as appropriate, be adjusted. Such adjustments shall be carried out with allowances from, or by adding allowances to, the amount of allowances set aside in accordance with paragraph 7 of this Article.’;
(n)
the following paragraph is added:
‘21.   In order to ensure the effective, non-discriminatory and uniform application of the adjustments and threshold referred to in paragraph 20 of this Article, to avoid any undue administrative burden, and to prevent manipulation or abuse of the adjustments to the allocation, the Commission may adopt implementing acts which define further arrangements for the adjustments. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 22a(2).’.
(15)
Articles 10b and 10c are replaced by the following:
‘Article 10b
Transitional measures to support certain energy intensive industries in the event of carbon leakage
1.   Sectors and subsectors in relation to which the product resulting from multiplying their intensity of trade with third countries, defined as the ratio between the total value of exports to third countries plus the value of imports from third countries and the total market size for the European Economic Area (annual turnover plus total imports from third countries), by their emission intensity, measured in kgCO2, divided by their gross value added (in euros), exceeds 0,2, shall be deemed to be at risk of carbon leakage. Such sectors and subsectors shall be allocated allowances free of charge for the period until 2030 at 100 % of the quantity determined pursuant to Article 10a.
2.   Sectors and subsectors in relation to which the product resulting from multiplying their intensity of trade with third countries by their emission intensity exceeds 0,15 may be included in the group referred to in paragraph 1, using data for the years from 2014 to 2016, on the basis of a qualitative assessment and of the following criteria:
(a)
the extent to which it is possible for individual installations in the sector or subsector concerned to reduce emission levels or electricity consumption;
(b)
current and projected market characteristics, including, where relevant, any common reference price;
(c)
profit margins as a potential indicator of long-run investment or relocation decisions, taking into account changes in costs of production relating to emission reductions.
3.   Sectors and subsectors that do not exceed the threshold referred to in paragraph 1, but have an emission intensity measured in kgCO2, divided by their gross value added (in euros), which exceeds 1,5, shall also be assessed at a 4-digit level (NACE-4 code). The Commission shall make the results of that assessment public.
Within three months of the publication referred to in the first subparagraph, the sectors and subsectors referred to in that subparagraph may apply to the Commission for either a qualitative assessment of their carbon leakage exposure at a 4-digit level (NACE-4 code) or an assessment on the basis of the classification of goods used for statistics on industrial production in the Union at an 8-digit level (Prodcom). To that end, sectors and subsectors shall submit duly substantiated, complete and independently verified data to enable the Commission to carry out the assessment together with the application.
Where a sector or subsector chooses to be assessed at a 4-digit level (NACE-4 code), it may be included in the group referred to in paragraph 1 on the basis of the criteria referred to in points (a), (b) and (c) of paragraph 2. Where a sector or subsector chooses to be assessed at an 8-digit level (Prodcom), it shall be included in the group referred to in paragraph 1 provided that, at that level, the threshold of 0,2 referred to in paragraph 1 is exceeded.
Sectors and subsectors for which free allocation is calculated on the basis of the benchmark values referred to in the fourth subparagraph of Article 10a(2) may also request to be assessed in accordance with the third subparagraph of this paragraph.
By way of derogation from paragraphs 1 and 2, a Member State may request, by 30 June 2018, that a sector or subsector listed in the Annex to Commission Decision 2014/746/EU (*6) in respect of classifications at a 6-digit or an 8-digit level (Prodcom) be considered to be included in the group referred to in paragraph 1. Any such request shall only be considered where the requesting Member State establishes that the application of that derogation is justified on the basis of duly substantiated, complete, verified and audited data for the five most recent years provided by the sector or subsector concerned, and includes all relevant information with its request. On the basis of those data, the sector or subsector concerned shall be included in respect of those classifications where, within a heterogeneous 4-digit level (NACE-4 code), it is shown that it has a substantially higher trade and emission intensity at a 6-digit or an 8-digit level (Prodcom), exceeding the threshold set out in paragraph 1.
4.   Other sectors and subsectors are considered to be able to pass on more of the costs of allowances in product prices, and shall be allocated allowances free of charge at 30 % of the quantity determined pursuant to Article 10a. Unless otherwise decided in the review pursuant to Article 30, free allocations to other sectors and subsectors, except district heating, shall decrease by equal amounts after 2026 so as to reach a level of no free allocation in 2030.
5.   The Commission is empowered to adopt, by 31 December 2019, delegated acts in accordance with Article 23 to supplement this Directive concerning the determination of sectors and subsectors deemed at risk of carbon leakage, as referred to in paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of this Article, for activities at a 4-digit level (NACE-4 code) as far as paragraph 1 of this Article is concerned, based on data for the three most recent calendar years available.
Article 10c
Option for transitional free allocation for the modernisation of the energy sector
1.   By way of derogation from Article 10a(1) to (5), Member States which had in 2013 a GDP per capita at market prices (in euros) below 60 % of the Union average may give a transitional free allocation to installations for electricity generation for the modernisation, diversification and sustainable transformation of the energy sector. The investments supported shall be consistent with the transition to a safe and sustainable low-carbon economy, the objectives of the Union's 2030 climate and energy policy framework, and reaching the long-term objectives expressed in the Paris Agreement. The derogation provided for in this paragraph shall end on 31 December 2030.
2.   The Member State concerned shall organise a competitive bidding process, to take place in one or more rounds between 2021 and 2030, for projects involving a total amount of investment exceeding EUR 12,5 million, in order to select the investments to be financed with free allocation. That competitive bidding process shall:
(a)
comply with the principles of transparency, non-discrimination, equal treatment and sound financial management;
(b)
ensure that only projects which contribute to the diversification of their energy mix and sources of supply, the necessary restructuring, environmental upgrading and retrofitting of the infrastructure, clean technologies, such as renewable energy technologies, or modernisation of the energy production sector, such as efficient and sustainable district heating, and of the transmission and distribution sector, are eligible to bid;
(c)
define clear, objective, transparent and non-discriminatory selection criteria for the ranking of projects, so as to ensure that only projects are selected which:
(i)
on the basis of a cost-benefit analysis, ensure a net positive gain in terms of emission reduction and realise a pre-determined significant level of CO2 reductions taking into account the size of the project;
(ii)
are additional, clearly respond to replacement and modernisation needs and do not supply a market-driven increase in energy demand;
(iii)
offer the best value for money; and
(iv)
do not contribute to or improve the financial viability of highly emission-intensive electricity generation or increase dependency on emission-intensive fossil fuels.
By way of derogation from Article 10(1) and without prejudice to the last sentence of paragraph 1 of this Article, in the event that an investment selected through the competitive bidding process is cancelled or the intended performance is not reached, the earmarked allowances may be used through a single additional round of the competitive bidding process at the earliest one year thereafter to finance other investments.
By 30 June 2019, any Member State intending to make use of optional transitional free allocation for the modernisation of the energy sector shall publish a detailed national framework setting out the competitive bidding process, including the planned number of rounds referred to in the first subparagraph, and the selection criteria, for public comment.
Where investments with a value of less than EUR 12,5 million are to be supported with free allocation and are not selected through the competitive bidding process referred to in this paragraph, the Member State shall select projects based on objective and transparent criteria. The results of this selection process shall be published for public comment. On this basis, the Member State concerned shall, by 30 June 2019, establish, publish and submit to the Commission a list of investments. Where more than one investment is carried out within the same installation, they shall be assessed as a whole to establish whether or not the value threshold of EUR 12,5 million is exceeded, unless those investments are, independently, technically or financially viable.
3.   The value of the intended investments shall at least equal the market value of the free allocation, while taking into account the need to limit directly linked price increases. The market value shall be the average of the price of allowances on the common auction platform in the preceding calendar year. Up to 70 % of the relevant costs of an investment may be supported using the free allocation, provided that the remaining costs are financed by private legal entities.
4.   Transitional free allocations shall be deducted from the quantity of allowances that the Member State would otherwise auction. The total free allocation shall be no more than 40 % of the allowances which the Member State concerned will receive, pursuant to Article 10(2)(a), in the period from 2021 to 2030, spread out in equal annual volumes over that period.
5.   Where a Member State, pursuant to Article 10d(4), uses allowances distributed for the purposes of solidarity, growth and interconnections within the Union in accordance with Article 10(2)(b), that Member State may, by way of derogation from paragraph 4 of this Article, use for transitional free allocation a total quantity of up to 60 % of the allowances received in the period from 2021 to 2030 pursuant to Article 10(2)(a), using a corresponding amount of the allowances distributed in accordance with Article 10(2)(b).
Any allowances not allocated under this Article by 2020 may be allocated over the period from 2021 to 2030 to investments selected through the competitive bidding process referred to in paragraph 2, unless the Member State concerned informs the Commission by 30 September 2019 of its intention not to allocate some or all of those allowances over the period from 2021 to 2030, and of the amount of allowances to be auctioned instead in 2020. Where such allowances are allocated over the period from 2021 to 2030, a corresponding amount of allowances shall be taken into account for the application of the 60 % limit set out in the first subparagraph of this paragraph.
6.   Allocations to operators shall be made upon demonstration that an investment selected in accordance with the rules of the competitive bidding process has been carried out. Where an investment leads to additional electricity generation capacity, the operator concerned shall also demonstrate that a corresponding amount of electricity-generation capacity with higher emission intensity has been decommissioned by it or another associated operator by the start of operation of the additional capacity.
7.   Member States shall require benefiting electricity generators and network operators to report, by 28 February of each year, on the implementation of their selected investments, including the balance of free allocation and investment expenditure incurred and the types of investments supported. Member States shall report on this to the Commission, and the Commission shall make such reports public.

(*6)  Commission Decision 2014/746/EU of 27 October 2014 determining, pursuant to Directive 2003/87/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council, a list of sectors and subsectors which are deemed to be exposed to a significant risk of carbon leakage, for the period 2015 to 2019 (OJ L 308, 29.10.2014, p. 114).’."
                        
(16)
The following Article is inserted:
‘Article 10d
Modernisation Fund
1.   A fund to support investments proposed by the beneficiary Member States, including the financing of small-scale investment projects, to modernise energy systems and improve energy efficiency, in Member States with a GDP per capita at market prices below 60 % of the Union average in 2013 (the “Modernisation Fund”), shall be established for the period from 2021 to 2030. The Modernisation Fund shall be financed through the auctioning of allowances as set out in Article 10.
The investments supported shall be consistent with the aims of this Directive, as well as the objectives of the Union's 2030 climate and energy policy framework and the long-term objectives as expressed in the Paris Agreement. No support from the Modernisation Fund shall be provided to energy generation facilities that use solid fossil fuels, other than efficient and sustainable district heating in Member States with a GDP per capita at market prices below 30 % of the Union average in 2013, provided that an amount of allowances of at least an equivalent value is used for investments under Article 10c that do not involve solid fossil fuels.
2.   At least 70 % of the financial resources from the Modernisation Fund shall be used to support investments in the generation and use of electricity from renewable sources, the improvement of energy efficiency, except energy efficiency relating to energy generation using solid fossil fuels, energy storage and the modernisation of energy networks, including district heating pipelines, grids for electricity transmission and the increase of interconnections between Member States, as well as to support a just transition in carbon-dependent regions in the beneficiary Member States, so as to support the redeployment, re-skilling and up-skilling of workers, education, job-seeking initiatives and start-ups, in dialogue with the social partners. Investments in energy efficiency in transport, buildings, agriculture and waste shall also be eligible.
3.   The Modernisation Fund shall operate under the responsibility of the beneficiary Member States. The EIB shall ensure that the allowances are auctioned in accordance with the principles and modalities laid down in Article 10(4), and shall be responsible for managing the revenues. The EIB shall pass on the revenues to the Member States upon a disbursement decision from the Commission, where this disbursement for investments is in line with paragraph 2 of this Article or, where the investments do not fall into the areas listed in paragraph 2 of this Article, is in line with the recommendations of the investment committee. The Commission shall adopt its decision in a timely manner. The revenues shall be distributed amongst the Member States and according to the shares set out in Annex IIb, in accordance with paragraphs 6 to 12 of this Article.
4.   Any Member State concerned may use the total free allocation granted pursuant to Article 10c(4), or part of that allocation, and the amount of allowances distributed for the purposes of solidarity, growth and interconnections within the Union in accordance with Article 10(2)(b), or part of that amount, in accordance with Article 10d, to support investments within the framework of the Modernisation Fund, thereby increasing the resources distributed to that Member State. By 30 September 2019, the Member State concerned shall notify the Commission of the respective amounts of allowances to be used under Article 10(2)(b), Article 10c and Article 10d.
5.   An investment committee for the Modernisation Fund is hereby established. The investment committee shall be composed of a representative from each beneficiary Member State, the Commission and the EIB, and three representatives elected by the other Member States for a period of five years. It shall be chaired by the representative of the Commission. One representative of each Member State that is not a member of the investment committee may attend meetings of the committee as an observer.
The investment committee shall operate in a transparent manner. The composition of the investment committee and the curricula vitae and declarations of interests of its members shall be made available to the public and, where necessary, updated.
6.   Before a beneficiary Member State decides to finance an investment from its share in the Modernisation Fund, it shall present the investment project to the investment committee and to the EIB. Where the EIB confirms that an investment falls into the areas listed in paragraph 2, the Member State may proceed to finance the investment project from its share.
Where an investment in the modernisation of energy systems, which is proposed to be financed from the Modernisation Fund, does not fall into the areas listed in paragraph 2, the investment committee shall assess the technical and financial viability of that investment, including the emission reductions it achieves, and issue a recommendation on financing the investment from the Modernisation Fund. The investment committee shall ensure that any investment relating to district heating achieves a substantial improvement in energy efficiency and emission reductions. That recommendation may include suggestions regarding appropriate financing instruments. Up to 70 % of the relevant costs of an investment which does not fall into the areas listed in paragraph 2 may be supported with resources from the Modernisation Fund provided that the remaining costs are financed by private legal entities.
7.   The investment committee shall strive to adopt its recommendations by consensus. If the investment committee is not able to decide by consensus within a deadline set by the chairman, it shall take a decision by simple majority.
If the representative of the EIB does not endorse financing an investment, a recommendation shall only be adopted if a majority of two-thirds of all members vote in favour. The representative of the Member State in which the investment is to take place and the representative of the EIB shall not be entitled to cast a vote in this case. This subparagraph shall not apply to small-scale projects funded through loans provided by a national promotional bank or through grants contributing to the implementation of a national programme serving specific objectives in line with the objectives of the Modernisation Fund, provided that not more than 10 % of the Member States' share set out in Annex IIb is used under the programme.
8.   Any acts or recommendations by the EIB or the investment committee made pursuant to paragraphs 6 and 7 shall be made in a timely manner and state the reasons on which they are based. Such acts and recommendations shall be made public.
9.   The beneficiary Member States shall be responsible for following up on the implementation with respect to selected projects.
10.   The beneficiary Member States shall report annually to the Commission on investments financed by the Modernisation Fund. The report shall be made public and include:
(a)
information on the investments financed per beneficiary Member State;
(b)
an assessment of the added value, in terms of energy efficiency or modernisation of the energy system, achieved through the investment.
11.   The investment committee shall report annually to the Commission on experience with the evaluation of investments. By 31 December 2024, taking into consideration the findings of the investment committee, the Commission shall review the areas for projects referred to in paragraph 2 and the basis on which the investment committee bases its recommendations.
12.   The Commission shall adopt implementing acts concerning detailed rules on the operation of the Modernisation Fund. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 22a(2).’.
(17)
In Article 11(1), the following subparagraph is added:
‘A list of installations covered by this Directive for the five years beginning on 1 January 2021 shall be submitted by 30 September 2019, and lists for each subsequent period of five years shall be submitted every five years thereafter. Each list shall include information on production activity, transfers of heat and gases, electricity production and emissions at sub-installation level over the five calendar years preceding its submission. Free allocations shall only be given to installations where such information is provided.’.
(18)
In Article 11a, paragraphs 8 and 9 are deleted.
(19)
In Article 11b, paragraph 7 is deleted.
(20)
In Article 12(4), the following sentences are added:
‘In the event of closure of electricity generation capacity in their territory due to additional national measures, Member States may cancel allowances from the total quantity of allowances to be auctioned by them referred to in Article 10(2) up to an amount corresponding to the average verified emissions of the installation concerned over a period of five years preceding the closure. The Member State concerned shall inform the Commission of such intended cancellation in accordance with the delegated acts adopted pursuant to Article 10(4).’.
(21)
Article 13 is replaced by the following:
‘Article 13
Validity of allowances
Allowances issued from 1 January 2013 onwards shall be valid indefinitely. Allowances issued from 1 January 2021 onwards shall include an indication showing in which ten-year period beginning from 1 January 2021 they were issued, and be valid for emissions from the first year of that period onwards.’.
(22)
In Article 14, paragraph 1 is replaced by the following:
‘1.   The Commission shall adopt implementing acts concerning the detailed arrangements for the monitoring and reporting of emissions and, where relevant, activity data, from the activities listed in Annex I, for the monitoring and reporting of tonne-kilometre data for the purpose of an application under Article 3e or 3f, which shall be based on the principles for monitoring and reporting set out in Annex IV and the requirements set out in paragraph 2 of this Article. Those implementing acts shall also specify the global warming potential of each greenhouse gas in the requirements for monitoring and reporting emissions for that gas.
Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 22a(2).’.
(23)
In Article 15, the third, fourth and fifth paragraphs are replaced by the following:
‘The Commission shall adopt implementing acts concerning the verification of emission reports based on the principles set out in Annex V and for the accreditation and supervision of verifiers. The Commission may also adopt implementing acts for the verification of reports submitted by aircraft operators pursuant to Article 14(3) and applications under Articles 3e and 3f, including the verification procedures to be used by verifiers. It shall specify conditions for the accreditation and withdrawal of accreditation, for mutual recognition and peer evaluation of accreditation bodies, as appropriate.
Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 22a(2).’.
(24)
In Article 16, paragraph 12 is replaced by the following:
‘12.   The Commission shall adopt implementing acts concerning detailed rules in respect of the procedures referred to in this Article. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 22a(2).’.
(25)
In Article 19, paragraph 3 is replaced by the following:
‘3.   The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 23 to supplement this Directive by laying down all necessary requirements concerning the Union Registry for the trading period commencing on 1 January 2013 and subsequent periods, in the form of standardised electronic databases containing common data elements to track the issue, holding, transfer and cancellation, as applicable, of allowances, and to provide for public access and confidentiality, as appropriate. Those delegated acts shall also include provisions to put into effect rules on the mutual recognition of allowances in agreements to link emission trading systems.’.
(26)
Article 21 is amended as follows:
(a)
in paragraph 1, the fourth sentence is replaced by the following:
‘The report shall be drawn up on the basis of a questionnaire or outline adopted by the Commission in the form of implementing acts. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 22a(2).’;
(b)
the following paragraph is added:
‘4.   Every three years, the report referred to in paragraph 1 shall also pay particular attention to the equivalent measures adopted for small installations excluded from the EU ETS. The issue of equivalent measures adopted for small installations shall also be considered in the exchange of information referred to in paragraph 3.’.
(27)
Article 22 is replaced by the following:
‘Article 22
Amendments to the Annexes
The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 23 to amend, where appropriate, the Annexes to this Directive, with the exception of Annexes I, IIa and IIb, in the light of the reports provided for in Article 21 and of the experience of the application of this Directive. Annexes IV and V may be amended in order to improve the monitoring, reporting and verification of emissions.’.
(28)
The following Article is inserted:
‘Article 22a
Committee procedure
1.   The Commission shall be assisted by the Climate Change Committee established by Article 26 of Regulation (EU) No 525/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council (*7). That committee shall be a committee within the meaning of Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council (*8).
2.   Where reference is made to this paragraph, Article 5 of Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 shall apply.
Where the committee delivers no opinion, the Commission shall not adopt the draft implementing act and the third subparagraph of Article 5(4) of Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 shall apply.

(*7)  Regulation (EU) No 525/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 May 2013 on a mechanism for monitoring and reporting greenhouse gas emissions and for reporting other information at national and Union level relevant to climate change and repealing Decision No 280/2004/EC (OJ L 165, 18.6.2013, p. 13)."
                        

(*8)  Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 February 2011 laying down the rules and general principles concerning mechanisms for control by the Member States of the Commission's exercise of implementing powers (OJ L 55, 28.2.2011, p. 13).’."
                        
(29)
Article 23 is replaced by the following:
‘Article 23
Exercise of the delegation
1.   The power to adopt delegated acts is conferred on the Commission subject to the conditions laid down in this Article.
2.   The power to adopt delegated acts referred to in Articles 3d(3), 10(4), 10a(1) and (8), 10b(5), 19(3), Article 22, Articles 24(3), 24a(1), 25a(1) and Article 28c shall be conferred on the Commission for an indeterminate period of time from 8 April 2018.
3.   The delegation of power referred to in Articles 3d(3), 10(4), 10a(1) and (8), 10b(5), 19(3), Article 22, Articles 24(3), 24a(1), 25a(1) and Article 28c may be revoked at any time by the European Parliament or by the Council. A decision to revoke shall put an end to the delegation of the power specified in that decision. It shall take effect the day following the publication of the decision in the Official Journal of the European Union or at a later date specified therein. It shall not affect the validity of any delegated acts already in force.
4.   Before adopting a delegated act, the Commission shall consult experts designated by each Member State in accordance with the principles laid down in the Interinstitutional Agreement of 13 April 2016 on Better Law-Making (*9).
5.   As soon as it adopts a delegated act, the Commission shall notify it simultaneously to the European Parliament and to the Council.
6.   A delegated act adopted pursuant to Articles 3d(3), 10(4), 10a(1) and (8), 10b(5), 19(3), Article 22, Articles 24(3), 24a(1), 25a(1) and Article 28c shall enter into force only if no objection has been expressed either by the European Parliament or by the Council within a period of two months of notification of that act to the European Parliament and to the Council or if, before the expiry of that period, the European Parliament and the Council have both informed the Commission that they will not object. That period shall be extended by two months at the initiative of the European Parliament or of the Council.

(*9)  
                                          OJ L 123, 12.5.2016, p. 1.’."
                        
(30)
Article 24 is amended as follows:
(a)
paragraph 1 is replaced by the following:
‘1.   From 2008, Member States may apply emission allowance trading in accordance with this Directive to activities and to greenhouse gases which are not listed in Annex I, taking into account all relevant criteria, in particular the effects on the internal market, potential distortions of competition, the environmental integrity of the EU ETS and the reliability of the planned monitoring and reporting system, provided that the inclusion of such activities and greenhouse gases is approved by the Commission, in accordance with delegated acts which the Commission is empowered to adopt in accordance with Article 23.’;
(b)
in paragraph 3, the second subparagraph is replaced by the following:
‘The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 23 to supplement this Directive to this effect.’.
(31)
Article 24a is amended as follows:
(a)
in paragraph 1, the first and second subparagraphs are replaced by the following:
‘1.   In addition to the inclusions provided for in Article 24, the Commission may adopt measures for issuing allowances or credits in respect of projects administered by Member States that reduce greenhouse gas emissions not covered by the EU ETS.
Such measures shall be consistent with acts adopted pursuant to former Article 11b(7) as in force before 8 April 2018. The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 23 to supplement this Directive by setting out the procedure to be followed.’;
(b)
paragraph 2 is deleted.
(32)
In Article 25, paragraph 2 is deleted.
(33)
In Article 25a(1), the first and second subparagraphs are replaced by the following:
‘Where a third country adopts measures for reducing the climate change impact of flights departing from that third country which land in the Union, the Commission, after consulting with that third country, and with Member States within the Committee referred to in Article 22a(1), shall consider options available in order to provide for optimal interaction between the EU ETS and that country's measures.
The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 23 to amend Annex I to this Directive to provide for flights arriving from the third country concerned to be excluded from the aviation activities listed in Annex I or to provide for any other amendments to the aviation activities listed in Annex I, except in relation to scope, which are required by an agreement concluded pursuant to Article 218 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union.’.
(34)
In Article 27(3), the second subparagraph is replaced by the following:
‘Any such installation shall stay in the EU ETS for the rest of the period referred to in Article 11(1) during which it was reintroduced.’.
(35)
The following Article is inserted:
‘Article 27a
Optional exclusion of installations emitting less than 2 500 tonnes
1.   Member States may exclude from the EU ETS installations that have reported to the competent authority of the Member State concerned emissions of less than 2 500 tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent, disregarding emissions from biomass, in each of the three years preceding the notification under point (a), provided that the Member State concerned:
(a)
notifies the Commission of each such installation before the list of installations pursuant to Article 11(1) is to be submitted or at the latest when that list is submitted to the Commission;
(b)
confirms that simplified monitoring arrangements are in place to assess whether any installation emits 2 500 tonnes or more of carbon dioxide equivalent, disregarding emissions from biomass, in any one calendar year;
(c)
confirms that if any installation emits 2 500 tonnes or more of carbon dioxide equivalent, disregarding emissions from biomass, in any one calendar year, the installation will be reintroduced into the EU ETS; and
(d)
makes the information referred to in points (a), (b) and (c) available to the public.
2.   When an installation is reintroduced into the EU ETS pursuant to point (c) of paragraph 1 of this Article, any allowances allocated pursuant to Article 10a shall be granted starting from the year of the reintroduction. Allowances allocated to such an installation shall be deducted from the quantity to be auctioned pursuant to Article 10(2) by the Member State in which the installation is situated.
3.   Member States may also exclude from the EU ETS reserve or backup units which did not operate more than 300 hours per year in each of the three years preceding the notification under point (a) of paragraph 1, under the same conditions as set out in paragraphs 1 and 2.’.
(36)
Article 28c is replaced by the following:
‘Article 28c
Provisions for monitoring, reporting and verification for the purpose of the global market-based measure
The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 23 to supplement this Directive concerning the appropriate monitoring, reporting and verification of emissions for the purpose of implementing the ICAO's global market-based measure on all routes covered by it. Those delegated acts shall be based on the relevant instruments adopted in the ICAO, shall avoid any distortion of competition and be consistent with the principles contained in the acts referred to in Article 14(1), and shall ensure that the emissions reports submitted are verified in accordance with the verification principles and criteria laid down in Article 15.’.
(37)
Article 30 is replaced by the following:
‘Article 30
Review in the light of the implementation of the Paris Agreement and the development of carbon markets in other major economies
1.   This Directive shall be kept under review in the light of international developments and efforts undertaken to achieve the long-term objectives of the Paris Agreement.
2.   The measures to support certain energy-intensive industries that may be subject to carbon leakage referred to in Articles 10a and 10b shall also be kept under review in the light of climate policy measures in other major economies. In this context, the Commission shall also consider whether measures in relation to the compensation of indirect costs should be further harmonised.
3.   The Commission shall report to the European Parliament and to the Council in the context of each global stocktake agreed under the Paris Agreement, in particular with regard to the need for additional Union policies and measures in view of necessary greenhouse gas reductions by the Union and its Member States, including in relation to the linear factor referred to in Article 9. The Commission may make proposals to the European Parliament and to the Council to amend this Directive where appropriate.
4.   Before 1 January 2020, the Commission shall present an updated analysis of the non-CO2 effects of aviation, accompanied, where appropriate, by a proposal on how best to address those effects.’.
(38)
In Annex IIa to Directive 2003/87/EC, the entries for Belgium, Italy, Luxembourg and Sweden are deleted.
(39)
Annex IIb to Directive 2003/87/EC is replaced by the text appearing in Annex I to this Directive.
(40)
Annex IV to Directive 2003/87/EC is amended in accordance with Annex II to this Directive.
