Article 40
Compliant EU fertilising products which present a risk
1.   Where, having carried out an evaluation under Article 38(1), a Member State finds that although an EU fertilising product is in compliance with this Regulation it presents a risk to human, animal or plant health, to safety or to the environment, it shall without delay require the relevant economic operator to take all appropriate measures, within a reasonable period prescribed by the market surveillance authority and commensurate with the nature of the risk, to ensure that the EU fertilising product concerned, when made available on the market, no longer presents that risk, to withdraw the EU fertilising product from the market or to recall it.
2.   The economic operator shall ensure that corrective action is taken in respect of all the EU fertilising products concerned that the economic operator has made available on the market throughout the Union.
3.   The Member State shall immediately inform the Commission and the other Member States. That information shall include all available details, in particular the data necessary for the identification of the EU fertilising product concerned, the origin and the supply chain of that EU fertilising product, the nature of the risk involved and the nature and duration of the national measures taken.
4.   The Commission shall without delay enter into consultation with the Member States and the relevant economic operator or operators and shall evaluate the national measures taken. On the basis of the results of that evaluation, the Commission shall adopt an implementing act in the form of a decision determining whether the national measure is justified or not, and where necessary, ordering appropriate measures.
Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 45(3).
On duly justified imperative grounds of urgency relating to the protection of human, animal or plant health, safety or the environment, the Commission shall adopt immediately applicable implementing acts in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 45(4).
5.   The Commission shall address its decision to all Member States and shall immediately communicate it to them and the relevant economic operator or operators.
