Article 9
Obligations of distributors
1.   When making an EU fertilising product available on the market distributors shall act with due care in relation to the requirements of this Regulation.
2.   Before making an EU fertilising product available on the market distributors shall verify that it is accompanied by the required documents, including the information referred to in Article 6(7) or Article 8(4) provided in the manner specified therein, in a language which can be easily understood by end-users in the Member State in which the EU fertilising product is to be made available on the market, and that the manufacturer and the importer have complied with the requirements set out in Article 6(5) and (6) and Article 8(3) respectively.
Where a distributor considers or has reason to believe that an EU fertilising product is not in conformity with this Regulation, the distributor shall not make the EU fertilising product available on the market until it has been brought into conformity. Furthermore, where the EU fertilising product presents a risk to human, animal or plant health, to safety or to the environment, the distributor shall inform the manufacturer or the importer to that effect as well as the market surveillance authorities.
3.   Distributors shall ensure that, while an EU fertilising product is under their responsibility, its storage or transport conditions do not jeopardise its compliance with the requirements set out in Annex I or III.
4.   Distributors who consider or have reason to believe that an EU fertilising product which they have made available on the market is not in conformity with this Regulation shall make sure that the corrective measures necessary to bring that EU fertilising product into conformity, to withdraw it or to recall it, as appropriate, are taken. Furthermore, where distributors consider or have reason to believe that an EU fertilising product which they have made available on the market presents a risk to human, animal or plant health, to safety or to the environment, they shall immediately inform the competent national authorities of the Member States in which they made the EU fertilising product available on the market to that effect, giving details, in particular, of any non-compliance and of any corrective measures taken.
5.   Distributors shall, further to a reasoned request from a competent national authority, provide it with all the information and documentation, in paper or electronic form, necessary to demonstrate the conformity of the EU fertilising product with this Regulation. They shall cooperate with that authority, at its request, on any action taken to eliminate the risks posed by EU fertilising products which they have made available on the market.
