Article 46
Amendments to Regulation (EC) No 1069/2009
Regulation (EC) No 1069/2009 is amended as follows:
(1)
in Article 5, paragraphs 2 and 3 are replaced by the following:
‘2.   For derived products referred to in Articles 32, 35 and 36 which no longer pose any significant risk to public or animal health, an end point in the manufacturing chain may be determined, beyond which they are no longer subject to the requirements of this Regulation.
Those derived products may subsequently be placed on the market without restrictions under this Regulation and shall no longer be subject to official controls in accordance with this Regulation.
The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 51a supplementing this Regulation by determining an end point in the manufacturing chain, beyond which derived products referred to in this paragraph are no longer subject to the requirements of this Regulation.
3.   In the event of risks to public or animal health, Articles 53 and 54 of Regulation (EC) No 178/2002 concerning emergency health measures shall apply mutatis mutandis to the derived products referred to in Articles 32, 33 and 36 of this Regulation.
4.   Within six months after 15 July 2019, the Commission shall initiate a first assessment of derived products referred to in Article 32 that are already widely used in the Union as organic fertilisers and soil improvers. This assessment shall cover at least the following products: meat meal, bone meal, meat-and-bone meal, hydrolysed proteins of Category 3 materials, processed manure, compost, biogas digestion residues, feather meal, glycerine and other products of Category 2 or 3 materials derived from the production of biodiesel and renewable fuels, as well as petfood, feed and dog chews that have been refused for commercial reasons or technical failures, and derived products from blood of animals, hides and skins, hoofs and horns, guano of bats and birds, wool and hair, feather and downs, and pig bristles. Where the assessment concludes that those derived products no longer pose any significant risk to public or animal health, the Commission shall determine an end point in the manufacturing chain pursuant to paragraph 2 of this Article without undue delay and in any case no later than six months after the assessment is finalised.’;
(2)
the following Article is inserted:
‘Article 51a
Exercise of the delegation
1.   The power to adopt delegated acts is conferred on the Commission subject to the conditions laid down in this Article.
2.   The power to adopt delegated acts referred to in Article 5(2) shall be conferred on the Commission for a period of five years from 15 July 2019. The Commission shall draw up a report in respect of the delegation of power not later than nine months before the end of the five-year period. The delegation of power shall be tacitly extended for periods of an identical duration, unless the European Parliament or the Council opposes such extension not later than three months before the end of each period.
3.   The delegation of power referred to in Article 5(2) may be revoked at any time by the European Parliament or by the Council. A decision to revoke shall put an end to the delegation of the power specified in that decision. It shall take effect the day following the publication of the decision in the Official Journal of the European Union or at a later date specified therein. It shall not affect the validity of any delegated acts already in force.
4.   Before adopting a delegated act, the Commission shall consult experts designated by each Member State in accordance with the principles laid down in the Interinstitutional Agreement of 13 April 2016 on Better Law-Making (*1).
5.   As soon as it adopts a delegated act, the Commission shall notify it simultaneously to the European Parliament and to the Council.
6.   A delegated act adopted pursuant to Article 5(2) shall enter into force only if no objection has been expressed either by the European Parliament or by the Council within a period of two months of notification of that act to the European Parliament and the Council or if, before the expiry of that period, the European Parliament and the Council have both informed the Commission that they will not object. That period shall be extended by two months at the initiative of the European Parliament or of the Council.

(*1)  
                                             OJ L 123, 12.5.2016, p. 1.’
                                          "
                        
