Article 38
Procedure at national level for dealing with EU fertilising products presenting a risk
1.   Where the market surveillance authorities of one Member State have sufficient reason to believe that an EU fertilising product presents a risk to human, animal or plant health, to safety or to the environment, they shall carry out an evaluation in relation to the EU fertilising product concerned covering all relevant requirements laid down in this Regulation. The relevant economic operators shall cooperate as necessary with the market surveillance authorities for that purpose.
Where, in the course of the evaluation referred to in the first subparagraph, the market surveillance authorities find that the EU fertilising product does not comply with the requirements laid down in this Regulation, they shall without delay require the relevant economic operator to take all appropriate corrective action, within a reasonable period prescribed by the market surveillance authorities and commensurate with the nature of the risk, to bring the EU fertilising product into compliance with those requirements, to withdraw the EU fertilising product from the market or to recall it.
The market surveillance authorities shall inform the relevant notified body accordingly.
Article 21 of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 shall apply to the measures referred to in the second subparagraph of this paragraph.
2.   Where the market surveillance authorities consider that non-compliance is not restricted to their national territory, they shall inform the Commission and the other Member States of the results of the evaluation and of the actions which they have required the economic operator to take.
3.   The economic operator shall ensure that all appropriate corrective action is taken in respect of all the EU fertilising products concerned that the economic operator has made available on the market throughout the Union.
4.   Where the relevant economic operator does not take adequate corrective action within the period referred to in the second subparagraph of paragraph 1, the market surveillance authorities shall take all appropriate provisional measures to prohibit or restrict the EU fertilising product being made available on their national market, to withdraw the EU fertilising product from that market or to recall it.
The market surveillance authorities shall inform the Commission and the other Member States, without delay, of those measures.
5.   The information referred to in the second subparagraph of paragraph 4 shall include all available details, in particular the data necessary for the identification of the non-compliant EU fertilising product, the origin of that EU fertilising product, the nature of the non-compliance alleged and the risk involved, the nature and duration of the national measures taken and the arguments put forward by the relevant economic operator. In particular, the market surveillance authorities shall indicate whether the non-compliance is due to any of the following:
(a)
failure of the EU fertilising product to meet the requirements set out in Annex I, II or III;
(b)
shortcomings in the harmonised standards referred to in Article 13;
(c)
shortcomings in the common specifications referred to in Article 14.
6.   Member States other than the Member State initiating the procedure under this Article shall without delay inform the Commission and the other Member States of any measures adopted and of any additional information at their disposal relating to the non-compliance of the EU fertilising product concerned, and, in the event of disagreement with the adopted national measure, of their objections.
7.   Where, within three months of receipt of the information referred to in the second subparagraph of paragraph 4, no objection has been raised by either a Member State or the Commission in respect of a provisional measure taken by a Member State, that measure shall be deemed justified.
8.   Member States shall ensure that appropriate restrictive measures, such as withdrawal of the EU fertilising product from the market, are taken without delay in respect of the EU fertilising product concerned.
9.   Obligations of the market surveillance authorities under this Article shall be without prejudice to the possibility for Member States to regulate fertilising products which are not EU fertilising products.
