Article 8
Obligations of importers
1.   Importers shall place only compliant EU fertilising products on the market.
2.   Before placing an EU fertilising product on the market, importers shall ensure that the appropriate conformity assessment procedure referred to in Article 15 has been carried out by the manufacturer. They shall ensure that the manufacturer has drawn up the technical documentation, that the EU fertilising product is accompanied by the required documents, and that the manufacturer has complied with the requirements set out in Article 6(5) and (6).
Where an importer considers or has reason to believe that an EU fertilising product is not in conformity with this Regulation, the importer shall not place the EU fertilising product on the market until it has been brought into conformity. Furthermore, where the EU fertilising product presents a risk to human, animal or plant health, to safety or to the environment, the importer shall inform the manufacturer and the market surveillance authorities to that effect.
3.   Importers shall indicate their name, registered trade name or registered trade mark and the postal address at which they can be contacted on the packaging of the EU fertilising product or, where the EU fertilising product is supplied without packaging, in a document accompanying the EU fertilising product. The contact details shall be in a language easily understood by end-users and market surveillance authorities.
4.   Importers shall ensure that EU fertilising products are accompanied by the information required under Annex III. Where an EU fertilising product is supplied in a package, the information shall appear on a label which is affixed to that package. Where the package is too small to contain all the information, the information that cannot be provided on the label shall be provided in a separate leaflet accompanying that package. Such a leaflet shall be regarded as part of the label. Where the EU fertilising product is supplied without packaging, all the information shall be provided in a leaflet. The label and the leaflet shall be accessible for inspection purposes when the EU fertilising product is made available on the market. The information shall be in a language which can be easily understood by end-users, as determined by the Member State concerned.
5.   Importers shall ensure that, while an EU fertilising product is under their responsibility, its storage or transport conditions do not jeopardise its compliance with the requirements set out in Annex I or III.
6.   When deemed appropriate with regard to the performance of, or the risks presented by an EU fertilising product, importers shall carry out sample testing of such EU fertilising products made available on the market, investigate, and, if necessary, keep a register of complaints, of non-conforming EU fertilising products and recalls of such EU fertilising products, and shall keep distributors informed of any such monitoring.
7.   Importers who consider or have reason to believe that an EU fertilising product which they have placed on the market is not in conformity with this Regulation shall immediately take the corrective measures necessary to bring that EU fertilising product into conformity, to withdraw it or to recall it, as appropriate. Furthermore, where importers consider or have reason to believe that an EU fertilising product which they have placed on the market presents a risk to human, animal or plant health, to safety or to the environment, they shall immediately inform the competent national authorities of the Member States in which they made the EU fertilising product available on the market to that effect, giving details, in particular, of any non-compliance and of any corrective measures taken.
8.   Importers shall, for 5 years after the EU fertilising product has been placed on the market, keep a copy of the EU declaration of conformity at the disposal of the market surveillance authorities and ensure that the technical documentation can be made available to those authorities, upon request.
On request, importers shall make a copy of the EU declaration of conformity available to other economic operators.
9.   Importers shall, further to a reasoned request from a competent national authority, provide it with all the information and documentation, in paper or electronic form, necessary to demonstrate the conformity of the EU fertilising product with this Regulation in a language which can be easily understood by that authority. They shall cooperate with that authority, at its request, on any action taken to eliminate the risks posed by an EU fertilising product which they have placed on the market.
