Article 7
Publication
1.   Each competent authority shall make public once a year an aggregated report on the public service obligations for which it is responsible, the selected public service operators and the compensation payments and exclusive rights granted to the said public service operators by way of reimbursement. This report shall distinguish between bus transport and rail transport, allow the performance, quality and financing of the public transport network to be monitored and assessed and, if appropriate, provide information on the nature and extent of any exclusive rights granted.
2.   Each competent authority shall take the necessary measures to ensure that, at least one year before the launch of the invitation to tender procedure or one year before the direct award, the following information at least is published in the Official Journal of the European Union:
(a)
the name and address of the competent authority;
(b)
the type of award envisaged;
(c)
the services and areas potentially covered by the award.
Competent authorities may decide not to publish this information where a public service contract concerns an annual provision of less than 50 000 kilometres of public passenger transport services.
Should this information change after its publication, the competent authority shall publish a rectification accordingly as soon as possible. This rectification shall be without prejudice to the launching date of the direct award or of the invitation to tender.
This paragraph shall not apply to Article 5(5).
3.   In the case of a direct award of public service contracts for transport by rail, as provided for in Article 5(6), the competent authority shall make public the following information within one year of granting the award:
(a)
name of the contracting entity, its ownership and, if appropriate, the name of the party or parties exercising legal control;
(b)
duration of the public service contract;
(c)
description of the passenger transport services to be performed;
(d)
description of the parameters of the financial compensation;
(e)
quality targets, such as punctuality and reliability and rewards and penalties applicable;
(f)
conditions relating to essential assets.
4.   When so requested by an interested party, a competent authority shall forward to it the reasons for its decision for directly awarding a public service contract.
