Article 16
1.   The competent authority acting in accordance with this Regulation, may refuse to grant an export authorisation and may annul, suspend, modify or revoke an export authorisation which it has already granted. Where the competent authority refuses, annuls, suspends, substantially limits or revokes an export authorisation or when it has determined that the intended export is not to be authorised, it shall notify the competent authorities of the other Member States and the Commission thereof and share the relevant information with them. In case the competent authority of a Member State has suspended an export authorisation, the final assessment shall be communicated to the competent authorities of the other Member States and the Commission at the end of the period of suspension.
2.   The competent authorities of the Member States shall review denials of authorisations notified under paragraph 1 within three years of their notification and revoke them, amend them or renew them. The competent authorities of the Member States shall notify the results of the review to the competent authorities of the other Member States and the Commission as soon as possible. Denials which are not revoked shall remain valid and shall be reviewed every three years. At the third review, the Member State concerned shall be required to explain the reasoning for maintaining such denial.
3.   The competent authority shall notify the competent authorities of the other Member States and the Commission of their decisions to prohibit a transit of dual-use items taken under Article 7 without delay. These notifications shall contain all relevant information including the classification of the item, its technical parameters, the country of destination and the end-user.
4.   Paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article shall also apply to authorisations for the provision of brokering services and technical assistance referred to in Article 13.
5.   Before the competent authority of a Member State decides whether or not to grant an authorisation or to prohibit a transit under this Regulation, it shall examine all valid denials or decisions to prohibit a transit of dual-use items listed in Annex I taken under this Regulation to ascertain whether an authorisation or a transit has been denied by the competent authorities of another Member State for an essentially identical transaction. It shall then consult the competent authorities of the Member States which issued such denials or decisions to prohibit the transit as provided for in paragraphs 1, 3 and 4 of this Article.
The competent authorities of the Member States consulted shall make known within 10 working days whether or not they consider the transaction in question to be an essentially identical transaction. If no reaction has been received within 10 working days, the competent authorities of the Member States consulted shall be regarded as not considering the transaction in question to be an essentially identical transaction.
If more information is required to correctly evaluate the transaction in question, the competent authorities of the Member States concerned shall agree on the extension of that 10-day period. However, the extension shall not exceed 30 working days.
If, following such consultation, the competent authority decides to grant an authorisation or allow the transit, it shall notify the competent authorities of the other Member States and the Commission, providing all relevant information to explain the decision.
6.   All notifications required pursuant to this Article shall be made via secure electronic means, including through the system referred to in Article 23(6).
7.   All information shared pursuant to this Article shall be in compliance with Article 23(5) concerning the confidentiality of such information.
