Article 11
1.   An authorisation shall be required for intra-Union transfers of dual-use items listed in Annex IV. Dual-use items listed in Part 2 of Annex IV shall not be covered by a general authorisation.
2.   A Member State may impose an authorisation requirement for the transfer of other dual-use items from its territory to another Member State in cases where at the time of transfer:
(a)
the operator or the competent authority knows that the final destination of the items concerned is outside the customs territory of the Union;
(b)
the export of those items to that final destination is subject to an authorisation requirement pursuant to Article 3, 4, 5, 9 or 10 in the Member State from which the items are to be transferred, and such export directly from its territory is not authorised by a general authorisation or a global authorisation; and
(c)
no processing or working as defined in Article 60(2) of the Union Customs Code is to be performed on the items in the Member State to which they are to be transferred.
3.   The transfer authorisation referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 shall be applied for in the Member State from which the dual-use items are to be transferred.
4.   In cases where the subsequent export of the dual-use items has already been accepted in the consultation procedures set out in Article 14 by the Member State from which the items are to be transferred, the transfer authorisation shall be issued to the operator immediately, unless the circumstances have substantially changed.
5.   A Member State which adopts legislation imposing an authorisation requirement as referred to in paragraph 2 shall, without delay, inform the Commission and the other Member States of the measures it has taken. The Commission shall publish that information in the C series of the Official Journal of the European Union.
6.   The application of measures taken pursuant to paragraphs 1 and 2 shall not involve the application of internal frontier controls within the customs territory of the Union, but solely controls which are performed as part of the normal control procedures applied in a non-discriminatory fashion throughout the customs territory of the Union.
7.   The application of measures taken pursuant to paragraphs 1 and 2 shall not result in transfers from one Member State to another being subject to more restrictive conditions than those imposed for exports of the same items to third countries.
8.   A Member State may, by national legislation, require that, for any intra-Union transfers from that Member State of items listed in Annex I, Category 5, Part 2, which are not listed in Annex IV, additional information concerning those items shall be provided to the competent authority of that Member State.
9.   The relevant commercial documents relating to intra-Union transfers of dual-use items listed in Annex I shall indicate clearly that those items are subject to controls if exported from the customs territory of the Union. Such documents include, in particular, any sales contract, order confirmation, invoice or dispatch note.
