Article 23
1.   Member States shall inform the Commission without delay of the laws, regulations and administrative provisions adopted in implementation of this Regulation, including:
(a)
a list of the competent authorities of the Member States empowered to:
—
grant export authorisations for dual-use items,
—
grant authorisations under this Regulation for the provision of brokering services and technical assistance,
—
prohibit the transit of non-Union dual-use items under this Regulation;
(b)
the measures referred to in Article 25(1).
The Commission shall forward the information to the other Member States and shall publish the information in the C series of the Official Journal of the European Union.
2.   Member States, in cooperation with the Commission, shall take all appropriate measures to establish direct cooperation and exchange of information between the competent authorities with a view to enhance the efficiency of the Union export control regime and to ensure the consistent and effective implementation and enforcement of control throughout the customs territory of the Union. The information exchange may include:
(a)
relevant licensing data, provided for each authorisation issued (e.g. value and types of licence and related destinations, number of users of general authorisations);
(b)
additional information regarding the application of controls, including information on the application of criteria set out in Article 15(1), the number of operators with an ICP and, where available, data on exports of dual-use items carried out in other Member States;
(c)
information regarding the analysis underlying additions or planned additions to national control lists pursuant to Article 9;
(d)
information regarding the enforcement of controls, including risk-based audits, details of exporters deprived of the right to use the national or Union general export authorisations, and, where available, number of violations, seizures and application of other penalties;
(e)
data on sensitive end-users, actors involved in suspicious procurement activities, and, where available, routes taken.
3.   The exchange of licensing data shall take place at least annually in accordance with guidelines to be drawn up by the Dual-Use Coordination Group established pursuant to Article 24 and with due consideration to legal requirements concerning the protection of personal information, commercially sensitive information or protected defence, foreign policy or national security information.
4.   Member States and the Commission shall regularly examine the implementation of Article 15 based on information submitted pursuant to this Regulation and analyses of such data. All participants of these exchanges shall respect the confidentiality of the discussions.
5.   Council Regulation (EC) No 515/97 (14), and in particular its provisions on the confidentiality of information, shall apply mutatis mutandis.
6.   A secure and encrypted system shall be developed by the Commission, in consultation with the Dual-Use Coordination Group set up pursuant to Article 24, to support direct cooperation and exchange of information between the competent authorities of the Member States and, where appropriate, the Commission. The system shall, where feasible, be connected by the Commission to the electronic licensing systems of the competent authorities of the Member States to the extent necessary for the purpose of facilitating this direct cooperation and exchange of information. The European Parliament shall be informed about the system’s budget, development and functioning.
7.   The processing of personal data shall be in accordance with the rules laid down in Regulations (EU) 2016/679 and (EU) 2018/1725.
