Article 8
1.   An authorisation shall be required for the provision of technical assistance related to dual-use items listed in Annex I if the provider of technical assistance has been informed by the competent authority that the items in question are or may be intended, in their entirety or in part, for any of the uses referred to in Article 4(1).
2.   Where a provider of technical assistance proposes to provide technical assistance for dual-use items listed in Annex I and is aware that those items are intended, in their entirety or in part, for any of the uses referred to in Article 4(1), the provider of technical assistance shall notify the competent authority. That competent authority shall decide whether or not to make such technical assistance subject to authorisation.
3.   Paragraphs 1 and 2 shall not apply if the technical assistance:
(a)
is provided within or into the territory of a country listed in Part 2 of Section A of Annex II, or towards a resident of a country listed in Part 2 of Section A of Annex II;
(b)
takes the form of transferring information that is in the public domain or basic scientific research within the meaning of the General Technology Note or of the Nuclear Technology Note set out in Annex I;
(c)
is provided by authorities or agencies of a Member State in the context of their official tasks;
(d)
is provided for the armed forces of a Member State on the basis of the tasks assigned to them;
(e)
is provided for a purpose which is cited in the exceptions for items of the Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR technology) in Annex IV; or
(f)
is the minimum necessary for the installation, operation, maintenance (checking) or repair of those items for which an export authorisation has been issued.
4.   A Member State may extend the application of paragraph 1 to non-listed dual-use items.
5.   A Member State may adopt or maintain national legislation imposing an authorisation requirement on the provision of technical assistance where a provider of technical assistance who proposes to provide technical assistance for dual-use items has grounds for suspecting that those items are or may be intended for any of the uses referred to in Article 4(1).
6.   Article 9(2), (3) and (4) shall apply to the national measures referred to in paragraphs 4 and 5 of this Article.
