Article 13
1.   Authorisations for the provision of brokering services and technical assistance under this Regulation shall be granted by the competent authority of the Member State where the broker or the provider of technical assistance is resident or established. Where the broker or the provider of technical assistance is not resident or established on the customs territory of the Union, authorisations for the provision of brokering services and technical assistance under this Regulation shall be granted by the competent authority of the Member State from where the brokering services or technical assistance will be provided.
2.   Authorisations for the provision of brokering services shall be granted for a set quantity of specific items and shall clearly identify the location of the items in the originating third country, the end-user and the exact location of the end-user.
Authorisations for technical assistance shall clearly identify the end-user and the exact location of the end-user.
The authorisations shall be valid throughout the customs territory of the Union.
3.   Brokers and providers of technical assistance shall supply the competent authority with all relevant information required for their application for authorisation under this Regulation, in particular details of the location of the dual-use items, a clear description of the items and the quantity involved, third parties involved in the transaction, the country of destination, the end-user in that country and its exact location.
4.   The competent authorities of the Member States shall process requests for authorisations for the provision of brokering services and technical assistance within a period of time to be determined by national law or practice.
5.   All authorisations for the provision of brokering services and technical assistance shall be issued, whenever possible, by electronic means on forms containing at least all the elements of and in the order provided for in the models set out in Section B of Annex III.
