Article 4
1.   An authorisation shall be required for the export of dual-use items not listed in Annex I if the exporter has been informed by the competent authority that the items in question are or may be intended, in their entirety or in part:
(a)
for use in connection with the development, production, handling, operation, maintenance, storage, detection, identification or dissemination of chemical, biological or nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices or the development, production, maintenance or storage of missiles capable of delivering such weapons;
(b)
for a military end-use if the purchasing country or country of destination is subject to an arms embargo; for the purposes of this point, ‘military end-use’ means:
(i)
incorporation into military items listed in the military list of Member States;
(ii)
use of production, test or analytical equipment and components therefor, for the development, production or maintenance of military items listed in the military list of Member States; or
(iii)
use of any unfinished products in a plant for the production of military items listed in the military list of Member States;
(c)
for use as parts or components of military items listed in the national military list that have been exported from the territory of a Member State without authorisation or in violation of an authorisation prescribed by the national legislation of that Member State.
2.   Where an exporter is aware that dual-use items which he proposes to export, not listed in Annex I, are intended, in their entirety or in part, for any of the uses referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article, the exporter shall notify the competent authority. That competent authority shall decide whether or not to make the export concerned subject to authorisation.
3.   A Member State may adopt or maintain national legislation imposing an authorisation requirement on the export of dual-use items not listed in Annex I if the exporter has grounds for suspecting that those items are or may be intended, in their entirety or in part, for any of the uses referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article.
4.   A Member State which imposes an authorisation requirement pursuant to paragraph 1, 2, or 3 shall immediately inform its customs authorities and other relevant national authorities and provide the other Member States and the Commission with relevant information on the authorisation requirement in question, in particular as regards the items and end-users concerned, unless it considers that it is not appropriate to do so in light of the nature of the transaction or the sensitivity of the information concerned.
5.   Member States shall give due consideration to information received pursuant to paragraph 4 and shall inform their customs authorities and other relevant national authorities thereof.
6.   In order to allow for an examination of all valid denials by the Member States, Article 16(1), (2) and (5) to (7) shall apply to cases concerning dual-use items not listed in Annex I.
7.   All exchanges of information required pursuant to this Article shall take place in accordance with the legal requirements concerning the protection of personal information, commercially sensitive information or protected defence, foreign policy or national security information. Such exchanges of information shall be made via secure electronic means, including through the system referred to in Article 23(6).
8.   This Regulation is without prejudice to the right of Member States to take national measures under Article 10 of Regulation (EU) 2015/479.
