Article 21
1.   When completing the formalities for the export of dual-use items at the customs office responsible for handling the export declaration, the exporter shall furnish proof that any necessary export authorisation has been obtained.
2.   A translation of any documents furnished as proof into an official language of the Member State where the export declaration is presented may be required of the exporter.
3.   Without prejudice to any powers conferred on it under, and pursuant to, the Union Customs Code, a Member State may also, for a period not exceeding the periods referred to in paragraph 4, suspend the process of export from its territory, or, if necessary, otherwise prevent the dual-use items which are or are not covered by a valid export authorisation from leaving the Union via its territory, where it has:
(a)
grounds for suspicion that:
(i)
relevant information was not taken into account when the authorisation was granted; or
(ii)
circumstances have materially changed since the grant of the authorisation; or
(b)
relevant information regarding the potential application of measures under Article 4(1).
4.   In the cases referred to in paragraph 3 of this Article, the Member State referred to in that paragraph shall consult the competent authority of the Member State which granted the export authorisation or which may take action pursuant to Article 4(1) without delay in order that the competent authority may take action pursuant to Article 4(1) or Article 16(1). If that competent authority decides to maintain the authorisation or not to take action pursuant to Article 4(1), it shall reply within 10 working days, which, at its request, may be extended to 30 working days in exceptional circumstances. In such case, or if no reply is received within 10 or 30 working days, as the case may be, the dual-use items shall be released immediately. The competent authority of the Member State which granted the authorisation shall inform the competent authorities of the other Member States and the Commission.
5.   The Commission, in cooperation with the Member States, may develop guidance to support interagency cooperation between licensing and customs authorities.
