Article 17
Transposition
1.   Member States shall bring into force the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply with this Directive by 3 July 2021. They shall immediately inform the Commission thereof.
However, the Member States shall apply the measures necessary to comply with:
—
Article 5 from 3 July 2021,
—
Article 6(1) from 3 July 2024,
—
Article 7(1) from 3 July 2021,
—
Article 8 by 31 December 2024 but, in relation to extended producer responsibility schemes established before 4 July 2018 and in relation to single-use plastic products listed in Section III of Part E of the Annex, by 5 January 2023.
When Member States adopt the measures referred to in this paragraph, they shall contain a reference to this Directive or shall be accompanied by such a reference on the occasion of their official publication. The methods of making such reference shall be laid down by Member States.
2.   Member States shall communicate to the Commission the text of the main measures of national law which they adopt in the field covered by this Directive.
3.   Provided that the waste management targets and objectives set out in Articles 4 and 8 are achieved, Member States may transpose the provisions set out in Articles 4(1) and 8(1) and (8), except as regards single-use plastic products listed in Section III of Part E of the Annex, by means of agreements between the competent authorities and the economic sectors concerned.
Such agreements shall meet the following requirements:
(a)
agreements shall be enforceable;
(b)
agreements need to specify objectives with the corresponding deadlines;
(c)
agreements shall be published in the national official journal or an official document equally accessible to the public and transmitted to the Commission;
(d)
the results achieved under an agreement shall be monitored regularly, reported to the competent authorities and to the Commission and made available to the public under the conditions set out in the agreement;
(e)
the competent authorities shall make provisions to examine the progress reached under an agreement; and
(f)
in case of non-compliance with an agreement Member States shall implement the relevant provisions of this Directive by legislative, regulatory or administrative measures.
