Article 13
Information systems and reporting
1.   Member States shall, for each calendar year, report to the Commission the following:
(a)
data on single-use plastic products listed in Part A of the Annex that have been placed on the market of the Member State each year, to demonstrate the consumption reduction in accordance with Article 4(1);
(b)
information on the measures taken by the Member State for the purposes of Article 4(1);
(c)
data on single-use plastic products listed in Part F of the Annex that have been separately collected in the Member State each year, to demonstrate the attainment of the separate collection targets in accordance with Article 9(1);
(d)
data on fishing gear containing plastic placed on the market and on waste fishing gear collected in the Member State each year;
(e)
information on recycled content in beverage bottles listed in Part F of the Annex to demonstrate the attainment of the targets laid down in Article 6(5); and
(f)
data on the post-consumption waste of single-use plastic products listed in Section III of Part E of the Annex that has been collected in accordance with Article 8(3).
Member States shall report the data and information electronically within 18 months of the end of the reporting year for which they were collected. The data and information shall be reported in the format established by the Commission in accordance with paragraph 4 of this Article.
The first reporting period shall be the calendar year 2022, with the exception of points (e) and (f) of the first subparagraph for which the first reporting period shall be the calendar year 2023.
2.   The data and information reported by Member States in accordance with this Article shall be accompanied by a quality check report. The data and information shall be reported in the format established by the Commission in accordance with paragraph 4.
3.   The Commission shall review the data and information reported in accordance with this Article and publish a report on the results of its review. The report shall assess the organisation of the collection of the data and information, the sources of data and information and the methodology used in Member States as well as the completeness, reliability, timeliness and consistency of that data and information. The assessment may include specific recommendations for improvement. The report shall be drawn up after the first reporting of the data and information by the Member States and thereafter at the intervals envisaged in Article 12(3c) of Directive 94/62/EC.
4.   By 3 January 2021, the Commission shall adopt implementing acts laying down the format for reporting data and information in accordance with points (a) and (b) of paragraph 1 and with paragraph 2 of this Article.
By 3 July 2020, the Commission shall adopt implementing acts laying down the format for reporting data in accordance with points (c) and (d) of paragraph 1 and with paragraph 2 of this Article.
By 1 January 2022, the Commission shall adopt implementing acts laying down the format for reporting data and information in accordance with points (e) and (f) of paragraph 1 and with paragraph 2 of this Article.
Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 16(2). The format developed according to Article 12 of Directive 94/62/EC shall be taken into consideration.
