Article 6
Product requirements
1.   Member States shall ensure that single-use plastic products listed in Part C of the Annex that have caps and lids made of plastic may be placed on the market only if the caps and lids remain attached to the containers during the products’ intended use stage.
2.   For the purposes of this Article, metal caps or lids with plastic seals shall not be considered to be made of plastic.
3.   By 3 October 2019, the Commission shall request the European standardisation organisations to develop harmonised standards relating to the requirement referred to in paragraph 1. Those standards shall in particular address the need to ensure the necessary strength, reliability and safety of beverage container closures, including those for carbonated drinks.
4.   From the date of publication of the references to harmonised standards referred to in paragraph 3 in the Official Journal of the European Union, single-use plastic products referred to in paragraph 1 which are in conformity with those standards or parts thereof shall be presumed to be in conformity with the requirement laid down in paragraph 1.
5.   With regard to beverage bottles listed in Part F of the Annex, each Member State shall ensure that:
(a)
from 2025, beverage bottles listed in Part F of the Annex which are manufactured from polyethylene terephthalate as the major component (‘PET bottles’) contain at least 25 % recycled plastic, calculated as an average for all PET bottles placed on the market on the territory of that Member State; and
(b)
from 2030, beverage bottles listed in Part F of the Annex contain at least 30 % recycled plastic, calculated as an average for all such beverage bottles placed on the market on the territory of that Member State.
By 1 January 2022, the Commission shall adopt implementing acts laying down the rules for the calculation and verification of the targets established in the first subparagraph of this paragraph. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 16(2).
