Article 38
Transitional provisions
1.   Boatmasters’ certificates issued in accordance with Directive 96/50/EC and certificates referred to in Article 1(6) of Directive 96/50/EC, as well as Rhine navigation licences referred to in Article 1(5) of Directive 96/50/EC, that were issued prior to 18 January 2022, shall remain valid on the Union inland waterways for which they were valid before that date, for a maximum of 10 years after that date.
Before 18 January 2032, the Member State that issued the certificates referred to in the first subparagraph shall issue to boatmasters who hold such certificates in accordance with the model prescribed by this Directive, upon their request, a Union certificate of qualification or a certificate as referred to in Article 10(2), subject to the boatmaster having provided satisfactory documentary evidence as referred to in points (a) and (c) of Article 11(1).
2.   When issuing Union certificates of qualification in accordance with paragraph 1 of this Article, Member States shall safeguard previously granted entitlements as far as possible, in particular as regards the specific authorisations referred to in Article 6.
3.   Crew members, other than boatmasters, who hold a certificate of qualification issued by a Member State prior to 18 January 2022, or who hold a qualification recognised in one or more Member States, may still rely on that certificate or qualification for a maximum of 10 years after that date. During that period, such crew members may continue to rely on Directive 2005/36/EC for the recognition of their qualification by other Member States’ authorities. Before the expiry of that period, they may apply to a competent authority issuing such certificates for a Union certificate of qualification or a certificate in application of Article 10(2), subject to the crew members having provided satisfactory evidence as referred to in points (a) and (c) of Article 11(1).
Where crew members referred to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph apply for a Union certificate of qualification or a certificate referred to in Article 10(2), Member States shall ensure that a certificate of qualification is issued for which the competence requirements are similar to or lower than those of the certificate to be replaced. A certificate for which the requirements are higher than those of the certificate to be replaced shall only be issued where the following conditions are met:
(a)
for the Union certificate of qualification as a boatman: 540 days of navigation time, including at least 180 days in inland navigation;
(b)
for the Union certificate of qualification as an able boatman: 900 days of navigation time, including at least 540 days in inland navigation;
(c)
for the Union certificate of qualification as a helmsman: 1 080 days of navigation time, including at least 720 days in inland navigation.
The navigation experience shall be demonstrated by means of a service record book, logbook or other proof.
The minimum durations of the navigation time as set in points (a), (b) and (c) of the second subparagraph of this paragraph may be reduced by a maximum of 360 days of navigation time where the applicant has a diploma which is recognised by the competent authority and which confirms the applicant’s specialised training in inland navigation comprising practical navigation work. The reduction of the minimum duration may not be greater than the duration of the specialised training.
4.   Service record books and logbooks issued prior to 18 January 2022 that were issued in accordance with rules other than those set out by this Directive may remain active for a maximum of 10 years after 18 January 2022.
5.   By way of derogation from paragraph 3, for crew members on ferries who hold national certificates that do not fall within the scope of Directive 96/50/EC and that were issued prior to 18 January 2022, such certificates shall remain valid on those Union inland waterways for which they were valid before this date for a maximum of 20 years after that date.
Before the expiry of that period, such crew members may apply to a competent authority issuing such certificates for a Union certificate of qualification or for a certificate referred to in Article 10(2), on condition that they provide satisfactory evidence as referred to in points (a) and (c) of Article 11(1). The second and the third subparagraph of paragraph 3 of this Article shall apply accordingly.
6.   By way of derogation from Article 4(1), until 17 January 2038, Member States may allow boatmasters who sail sea-going ships operating on specific inland waterways to carry a certificate of competency for masters that has been issued in accordance with the provisions of the STCW Convention, provided that:
(a)
this inland navigation activity is performed at the beginning or at the end of a maritime transport journey; and
(b)
the Member State has recognised certificates referred to in this paragraph for at least five years on 16 January 2018 on the inland waterways concerned.
