Article 19
Approval of training programmes
1.   Member States may establish training programmes for the persons referred to in Articles 4, 5 and 6. Member States shall ensure that such training programmes leading to diplomas or certificates that demonstrate compliance with the standards of competence referred to in Article 17(1) are approved by the competent authorities of the Member States in whose territory the relevant education or training institute conducts its training programmes.
Member States shall ensure that the quality assessment and assurance of the training programmes is ensured by the application of a national or international quality standard in accordance with Article 27(1).
2.   Member States may approve the training programmes referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article only if:
(a)
the training objectives, learning content, methods, media of delivery, procedures, including the use of simulators, where applicable, and course materials are properly documented and allow applicants to achieve the standards of competence referred to in Article 17(1);
(b)
the programmes for the assessment of the relevant competences are conducted by qualified persons who have in-depth knowledge of the training programme;
(c)
an examination to verify compliance with the standards of competence referred to in Article 17(1) is carried out by qualified examiners who are free from conflicts of interest.
3.   Member States shall recognise any diplomas or certificates awarded after the completion of training programmes approved by other Member States in accordance with paragraph 1.
4.   Member States shall revoke or suspend their approval of training programmes that no longer comply with the criteria set out in paragraph 2.
5.   Member States shall notify to the Commission the list of the approved training programmes, as well as any training programmes whose approval has been revoked or suspended. The Commission shall make this information publicly available. The list shall indicate the name of the training programme, the titles of diplomas or certificates awarded, the body awarding the diploma or certificates, the year of entry into force of the approval, as well as the relevant qualification and any specific authorisations to which the diploma or certificate gives access.
