Article 20
Assessment of competences for specific risks
1.   The Member States that identify stretches of inland waterways with specific risks in their territories, within the meaning of Article 9(1), shall specify the additional competence required from boatmasters navigating on those stretches of inland waterways, and shall specify the means necessary to prove that such requirements are met. Where Member States consider it to be necessary for the purpose of ensuring safety, they shall consult the relevant European River Commission during the process of identifying those competences.
Taking into account the competences required for navigating on the stretch of inland waterway with specific risks, the means necessary to prove that such requirements are met may consist of the following:
(a)
a limited number of journeys to be carried out on the stretch concerned;
(b)
a simulator examination;
(c)
a multiple choice examination;
(d)
an oral examination; or
(e)
a combination of the means referred to in points (a) to (d).
When applying this paragraph, the Member States shall apply objective, transparent, non-discriminatory and proportionate criteria.
2.   The Member States referred to in paragraph 1 shall ensure that procedures are put in place for assessing applicants’ competence for specific risks, and that tools are made publicly available to facilitate the acquisition by boatmasters of the required competence for specific risks.
3.   A Member State may carry out an assessment of applicants’ competence for specific risks for stretches of inland waterways located in another Member State, on the basis of the requirements established for that stretch of inland waterway in accordance with paragraph 1, provided that the Member State where the stretch of inland waterway is located gives its consent. In such case, that Member State shall provide the Member State carrying out the assessment with the necessary means to carry it out. Member States shall justify any refusal to give consent on objective and proportional grounds.
