Article 22
Service record book and logbook
1.   The Member States shall ensure that boatmasters record navigation time, referred to in point (b) of Article 11(1), and journeys carried out, referred to in Article 20(1), in a service record book as referred to in paragraph 6 of this Article or in a service record book recognised pursuant to Article 10(2) or (3).
By way of derogation from the first subparagraph, when Member States apply Article 7(1) or Article 39(2), the obligation laid down in the first subparagraph of this paragraph shall apply only if a holder of a service record book requests the recording.
2.   The Member States shall ensure that, if a crew member so requests, their competent authorities, after having verified the authenticity and validity of any necessary documentary evidence, validate in the service record book the data regarding navigation time and journeys carried out up to 15 months before the request. Where electronic tools are put in place, including electronic service record books and electronic logbooks, including appropriate procedures for safeguarding the authenticity of the documents, the corresponding data may be validated without additional procedures.
Navigation time that has been acquired on any of the Member States’ inland waterways shall be taken into consideration. In the case of inland waterways whose courses are not fully within Union territory, the navigation time acquired on sections located outside the Union territory shall also be taken into consideration.
3.   Member States shall ensure that the journeys of craft referred to in Article 2(1) are recorded in the logbook referred to in paragraph 6 of this Article or in a logbook recognised pursuant to Articles 10(2) or (3).
4.   The Commission shall adopt implementing acts establishing models for service record books and logbooks, taking into account the information required for the implementation of this Directive as regards the identification of the person, their navigation time and the journeys carried out. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the advisory procedure referred to in Article 33(2).
When adopting those implementing acts, the Commission shall take into account the fact that the logbook is also used in the implementation of Council Directive 2014/112/EU (14), for verifying manning requirements and recording journeys of the craft.
5.   The Commission shall submit to the European Parliament and to the Council an assessment of tamper-proof electronic service record books, logbooks and professional cards that incorporate Union certificates of qualification in inland navigation, by 17 January 2026.
6.   Member States shall ensure that crew members hold a single active service record book and that there is a single active logbook on the craft.
