Article 39
Transposition
1.   Member States shall bring into force the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply with this Directive by 17 January 2022. They shall immediately inform the Commission thereof.
When Member States adopt those measures, they shall contain a reference to this Directive or be accompanied by such a reference on the occasion of their official publication. The methods of making such reference shall be laid down by Member States.
2.   By way of derogation from paragraph 1 of this Article, a Member State in which all persons referred to in Article 4(1), Article 5(1) and Article 6 operate exclusively on national inland waterways that are not linked to the navigable network of another Member State shall only be obliged to bring into force those measures which are necessary to ensure compliance with Articles 7, 8, 10 as regards recognition of certificates of qualification and the service record book, Article 14(2) and (3) as regards suspensions, the second subparagraph of Article 22(1) and (2), point (d) of Article 26(1) where applicable, points (e) and (h) of Article 26(1), Article 26(2), Article 29 as regards prevention of fraud, Article 30 as regards penalties and Article 38 with the exception of paragraph 2 of that Article as regards transitional provisions. Such Member State shall bring those measures into force by 17 January 2022.
Such Member State may not issue Union certificates of qualifications or approve training programmes or simulators until it has transposed and implemented the remaining provisions of this Directive and has informed the Commission that it has done so.
3.   By way of derogation from paragraph 1 of this Article, a Member State in which all persons are exempted pursuant to Article 2(3) shall only be obliged to bring into force those measures which are necessary to ensure compliance with Article 10 as regards recognition of certificates of qualification and the service record book, with Article 38 as regards recognition of valid certificates, as well as with Article 15. Such Member State shall bring those measures into force by 17 January 2022.
Such Member State may not issue Union certificates of qualification or approve training programmes or simulators until it has transposed and implemented the remaining provisions of this Directive and has informed the Commission that it has done so.
4.   By way of derogation from paragraph 1 of this Article, a Member State shall not be obliged to transpose this Directive as long as inland waterway navigation is not technically possible on its territory.
Such Member State may not issue Union certificates of qualification or approve training programmes or simulators until it has transposed and implemented the provisions of this Directive and informed the Commission that it has done so.
5.   Member States shall communicate to the Commission the text of the main provisions of national law which they adopt in the field covered by this Directive.
