Article 3
Objectives
1.   The general objective of the Fund shall be to contribute to the efficient management of migration flows and to the implementation, strengthening and development of the common policy on asylum, subsidiary protection and temporary protection and the common immigration policy, while fully respecting the rights and principles enshrined in the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union.
2.   Within its general objective, the Fund shall contribute to the following common specific objectives:
(a)
to strengthen and develop all aspects of the Common European Asylum System, including its external dimension;
(b)
to support legal migration to the Member States in accordance with their economic and social needs, such as labour market needs, while safeguarding the integrity of the immigration systems of Member States, and to promote the effective integration of third-country nationals;
(c)
to enhance fair and effective return strategies in the Member States which contribute to combating illegal immigration, with an emphasis on sustainability of return and effective readmission in the countries of origin and transit;
(d)
to enhance solidarity and responsibility-sharing between the Member States, in particular towards those most affected by migration and asylum flows, including through practical cooperation.
The achievement of the specific objectives of the Fund shall be evaluated in accordance with Article 55(2) of Regulation (EU) No 514/2014 using common indicators as set out in Annex IV to this Regulation and programme-specific indicators included in national programmes.
3.   Measures taken to achieve the objectives referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 shall be fully coherent with measures supported through the external financing instruments of the Union and with the principles and general objectives of the Union’s external action.
4.   The objectives referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article shall be achieved with due regard to the principles and objectives of the Union’s humanitarian policy. Consistency with the measures funded by the Union’s external financing instruments shall be ensured in accordance with Article 24.
