Article 14
Global resources and implementation
1.   The global resources for the implementation of this Regulation shall be EUR 3 137 million in current prices.
2.   The annual appropriations for the Fund shall be authorised by the European Parliament and the Council within the limits of the multiannual financial framework.
3.   The global resources shall be implemented through the following means:
(a)
national programmes, in accordance with Article 19;
(b)
Union actions, in accordance with Article 20;
(c)
emergency assistance, in accordance with Article 21;
(d)
the European Migration Network, in accordance with Article 22;
(e)
technical assistance, in accordance with Article 23.
4.   The budget allocated under this Regulation to Union actions referred to in Article 20 of this Regulation, to the emergency assistance referred to in Article 21 of this Regulation, to the European Migration Network referred to in Article 22 of this Regulation and to the technical assistance referred to in Article 23 of this Regulation shall be implemented under direct management in accordance with point (a) of Article 58(1) of Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012 and, where appropriate, under indirect management in accordance with point (c) of Article 58(1) of Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012. The budget allocated to national programmes referred to in Article 19 of this Regulation shall be implemented under shared management in accordance with point (b) of Article 58(1) of Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012.
5.   The Commission shall remain responsible for the implementation of the Union budget in accordance with Article 317 TFEU and shall inform the European Parliament and the Council of the operations carried out by entities other than Member States.
6.   Without prejudice to the prerogatives of the European Parliament and of the Council, the prime reference financial envelope shall be used indicatively as follows:
(a)
EUR 2 752 million for national programmes of Member States;
(b)
EUR 385 million for Union actions, emergency assistance, the European Migration Network and technical assistance of the Commission, of which at least 30 % shall be used for Union actions and the European Migration Network.
