Article 17
Resources for the Union Resettlement Programme
1.   Member States shall, in addition to their allocation calculated in accordance with point (a) of Article 15(1), receive every two years an additional amount as set out in point (b) of Article 15(2) based on a lump sum of EUR 6 000 for each resettled person.
2.   The lump sum referred to in paragraph 1 shall be increased to EUR 10 000 for each person resettled in accordance with the common Union resettlement priorities established pursuant to paragraph 3 and listed in Annex III and for each vulnerable person as laid down in paragraph 5.
3.   The common Union resettlement priorities shall be based on the following general categories of persons:
(a)
persons from a country or region designated for the implementation of a Regional Protection Programme;
(b)
persons from a country or region which has been identified in the UNHCR resettlement forecast and where Union common action would have a significant impact on addressing the protection needs;
(c)
persons belonging to a specific category falling within the UNHCR resettlement criteria.
4.   The Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 26 to amend Annex III, on the basis of the general categories set out in paragraph 3 of this Article, where there is a clear justification for doing so or in the light of any recommendations from the UNHCR.
5.   The following vulnerable groups of persons shall also qualify for the lump sum provided for in paragraph 2:
(a)
women and children at risk;
(b)
unaccompanied minors;
(c)
persons having medical needs that can be addressed only through resettlement;
(d)
persons in need of emergency resettlement or urgent resettlement for legal or physical protection needs, including victims of violence or torture.
6.   Where a Member State resettles a person belonging to more than one of the categories referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2, it shall receive the lump sum for that person only once.
7.   Where appropriate, Member States may also be eligible for lump sums for family members of persons referred to in paragraphs 1, 3 and 5, provided that those family members have been resettled in accordance with this Regulation.
8.   The Commission shall establish, by way of implementing acts, the timetable and other implementation conditions related to the allocation mechanism of resources for the Union Resettlement Programme. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the advisory procedure referred to in Article 27(2).
9.   The additional amounts referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article shall be allocated to the Member States every two years, for the first time in the individual financing decisions approving their national programme in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 14 of Regulation (EU) No 514/2014, and later in a financing decision to be annexed to the decisions approving their national programme. Those amounts shall not be transferred to other actions under the national programme.
10.   To effectively pursue the objectives of the Union Resettlement Programme and within the limits of available resources, the Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 26 to adjust, if deemed appropriate, the lump sums referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article, in particular taking into account the current rates of inflation, relevant developments in the field of resettlement, as well as factors which can optimise the use of the financial incentive brought by the lump sums.
