Article 17
1.   Each Member State shall adopt measures for the sharing of spatial data sets and services between its public authorities referred to in point (9)(a) and (b) of Article 3. Those measures shall enable those public authorities to gain access to spatial data sets and services, and to exchange and use those sets and services, for the purposes of public tasks that may have an impact on the environment.
2.   The measures provided for in paragraph 1 shall preclude any restrictions likely to create practical obstacles, occurring at the point of use, to the sharing of spatial data sets and services.
3.   Member States may allow public authorities that supply spatial data sets and services to license them to, and/or require payment from, the public authorities or institutions and bodies of the Community that use these spatial data sets and services. Any such charges and licenses must be fully compatible with the general aim of facilitating the sharing of spatial data sets and services between public authorities. Where charges are made, these shall be kept to the minimum required to ensure the necessary quality and supply of spatial data sets and services together with a reasonable return on investment, while respecting the self-financing requirements of public authorities supplying spatial data sets and services, where applicable. Spatial data sets and services provided by Member States to Community institutions and bodies in order to fulfil their reporting obligations under Community legislation relating to the environment shall not be subject to any charging.
4.   The arrangements for the sharing of spatial data sets and services provided for in paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 shall be open to public authorities referred to in point (9)(a) and (b) of Article 3 of other Member States and to the institutions and bodies of the Community, for the purposes of public tasks that may have an impact on the environment.
5.   The arrangements for the sharing of spatial data sets and services provided for in paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 shall be open, on a reciprocal and equivalent basis, to bodies established by international agreements to which the Community and Member States are parties, for the purposes of tasks that may have an impact on the environment.
6.   Where the arrangements for the sharing of spatial data sets and services provided for in paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 are made available in accordance with paragraphs 4 and 5, these arrangements may be accompanied by requirements under national law conditioning their use.
7.   By way of derogation from this Article, Member States may limit sharing when this would compromise the course of justice, public security, national defence or international relations.
8.   Member States shall provide the institutions and bodies of the Community with access to spatial data sets and services in accordance with harmonised conditions. Implementing rules governing those conditions, designed to amend non-essential elements of this Directive by supplementing it, shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 22(3). These implementing rules shall fully respect the principles set out in paragraphs 1 to 3.
