Article 9
Committee procedure
1.   The Commission shall be assisted by the Committee established under Article 21(1) of Directive 2000/60/EC. That Committee is a committee within the meaning of Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 February 2011 laying down the rules and general principles concerning mechanisms for control by Member States of the Commission’s exercise of implementing powers (*8).
2.   Where reference is made to this paragraph, Article 5 of Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 shall apply.
Where the Committee delivers no opinion, the Commission shall not adopt the draft implementing act and the third subparagraph of Article 5(4) of Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 shall apply.
Article 9a
Exercise of the delegation
1.   The power to adopt delegated acts is conferred on the Commission subject to the conditions laid down in this Article.
2.   The power to adopt delegated acts referred to in Article 3(8) shall be conferred on the Commission for a period of six years from 13 September 2013. The Commission shall draw up a report in respect of the delegation of power not later than nine months before the end of the six-year period. The delegation of power shall be tacitly extended for periods of an identical duration, unless the European Parliament or the Council opposes such extension not later than three months before the end of each period.
3.   The delegation of power referred to in Article 3(8) may be revoked at any time by the European Parliament or by the Council. A decision to revoke shall put an end to the delegation of the power specified in that decision. It shall take effect the day following the publication of the decision in the Official Journal of the European Union or at a later date specified therein. It shall not affect the validity of any delegated acts already in force.
4.   As soon as it adopts a delegated act, the Commission shall notify it simultaneously to the European Parliament and to the Council.
5.   A delegated act adopted pursuant to Article 3(8) shall enter into force only if no objection has been expressed either by the European Parliament or the Council within a period of two months of notification of that act to the European Parliament and the Council or if, before the expiry of that period, the European Parliament and the Council have both informed the Commission that they will not object. That period shall be extended by two months at the initiative of the European Parliament or of the Council.

(*6)  Directive 2001/82/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 6 November 2001 on the Community code relating to veterinary medicinal products (OJ L 311, 28.11.2001, p. 1)."
                        

(*7)  Directive 2001/83/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 6 November 2001 on the Community code relating to medicinal products for human use (OJ L 311, 28.11.2001, p. 67)."
                        

(*8)  
                                          OJ L 55, 28.2.2011, p. 13.’;"
                        
(6)
Annex I is amended as follows:
(a)
Part A is replaced by the text set out in Annex II to this Directive;
(b)
points 2 and 3 of Part B are replaced by the following:
‘2.
However, in accordance with Section 1.3.4 of Annex V to Directive 2000/60/EC, Member States may introduce statistical methods, such as a percentile calculation, to ensure an acceptable level of confidence and precision for determining compliance with the MAC-EQS. Where Member States do so, such statistical methods shall comply with detailed rules laid down in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 9(2) of this Directive.
3.
By way of derogation from the first subparagraph, in the case of cadmium, lead, mercury and nickel (hereinafter “metals”), the water EQS refer to the dissolved concentration, i.e. the dissolved phase of a water sample obtained by filtration through a 0,45 μm filter or any equivalent pre-treatment, or, where specifically indicated, to the bioavailable concentration.
Member States may, when assessing the monitoring results against the relevant EQS, take into account:
(a)
natural background concentrations for metals and their compounds where such concentrations prevent compliance with the relevant EQS;
(b)
hardness, pH, dissolved organic carbon or other water quality parameters that affect the bioavailability of metals, the bioavailable concentrations being determined using appropriate bioavailability modelling.’;
(7)
Annexes II and III are deleted.
