Article 1
Amendments
Directive 2002/96/EC is hereby amended as follows:
1.
the second subparagraph of Article 6(1) shall be replaced by the following:
‘Annex II may be amended in order to introduce other treatment technologies ensuring at least the same level of protection for human health and the environment. Those measures, designed to amend non-essential elements of this Directive, shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 14(3).’;
2.
the second subparagraph of Article 7(3) shall be replaced by the following:
‘Detailed rules for monitoring the compliance of Member States with the targets set out in paragraph 2, including specifications for materials, shall be established. Those measures, designed to amend non-essential elements of this Directive by supplementing it, shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 14(3).’;
3.
Article 13 shall be replaced by the following:
‘Article 13
Adaptation to scientific and technical progress
Any amendments which are necessary in order to adapt Article 7(3), Annex IB (in particular with a view to possibly adding luminaires in households, filament bulbs and photovoltaic products, i.e. solar panels), Annex II (in particular taking into account new technical developments for the treatment of WEEE), and Annexes III and IV to scientific and technical progress shall be adopted. Those measures, designed to amend non-essential elements of this Directive, shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 14(3).
Before the annexes are amended the Commission shall, inter alia, consult producers of electrical and electronic equipment, recyclers, treatment operators and environmental organisations and employees' and consumer associations. ’;
4.
Article 14(3) shall be replaced by the following:
‘3.   Where reference is made to this paragraph, Article 5a(1) to (4) and Article 7 of Decision 1999/468/EC shall apply, having regard to the provisions of Article 8 thereof.’;
5.
point 4 of Annex II shall be replaced by the following:
‘4.
