Article 33
General investigations
1.   In order to carry out its duties under this Regulation, ESMA may conduct all necessary investigations of the persons referred to in Article 32(1). To that end, the officials and other persons authorised by ESMA shall be empowered to:
(a)
examine any records, data, procedures and any other material relevant to the execution of their tasks irrespective of the medium on which they are stored;
(b)
take or obtain certified copies of or extracts from such records, data, procedures and other material;
(c)
summon and ask any person referred to in Article 32(1), or their representatives or staff, for oral or written explanations on facts or documents related to the subject matter and purpose of the investigation and to record the answers;
(d)
interview any other natural or legal person who consents to be interviewed for the purpose of collecting information relating to the subject matter of an investigation;
(e)
request records of telephone and data traffic.
2.   The officials and other persons authorised by ESMA for the purposes of the investigations referred to in paragraph 1 shall exercise their powers upon the production of a written authorisation specifying the subject matter and purpose of the investigation. That authorisation shall also indicate the periodic penalty payments provided for in Article 37(1) where the production of the required records, data, procedures or any other material, or the information supplied by the persons referred to in Article 32(1), are not provided or are incomplete, and the fines provided for in Article 36 where the information supplied by the persons referred to in Article 32(1) is incorrect or misleading.
3.   The persons referred to in Article 32(1) of this Regulation shall submit to investigations launched on the basis of a decision of ESMA. The decision shall specify the subject matter and purpose of the investigation, the periodic penalty payments provided for in Article 37 of this Regulation, the legal remedies available under Regulation (EU) No 1095/2010 and the right to have the decision reviewed by the Court of Justice of the European Union.
4.   In good time before the investigation, ESMA shall inform the competent authority of the Member State in whose territory that investigation is to be carried out of the investigation and of the identity of the persons authorised by ESMA for the purposes of the investigation. Officials of the competent authority concerned shall, upon the request of ESMA, assist those authorised persons in carrying out their duties. Officials of the competent authority concerned may also attend the investigation upon request.
5.   If a request for records of telephone or data traffic referred to in paragraph 1, point (e), requires authorisation from a judicial authority according to national rules, such authorisation shall be applied for. Such authorisation may also be applied for as a precautionary measure.
6.   Where an authorisation as referred to in paragraph 5 is applied for, the national judicial authority shall verify that the decision of ESMA is authentic and that the coercive measures envisaged are neither arbitrary nor excessive having regard to the subject matter of the investigation. When verifying the proportionality of the coercive measures, the national judicial authority may ask ESMA for detailed explanations, in particular relating to the grounds ESMA has for suspecting that an infringement of this Regulation has taken place, the seriousness of the suspected infringement and the nature of the involvement of the person subject to the coercive measures. However, the national judicial authority shall not review the necessity for the investigation or demand that it be provided with the information on ESMA’s file. The lawfulness of ESMA’s decision shall be subject to review only by the Court of Justice of the European Union following the procedure set out in Regulation (EU) No 1095/2010.
