Article 5
Additional or reduced technical requirements for certain zones
1.   Each Member State may, after consulting the Commission, and where applicable subject to the requirements of the Revised Convention for Rhine Navigation, adopt technical requirements additional to those in Annex II for craft operating on Zone 1 and 2 waterways within its territory.
2.   In respect of passenger vessels operating on Zone 3 waterways within its territory that are not linked to the navigable inland waterways of another Member State, each Member State may maintain technical requirements additional to those in Annex II. Amendments to such technical requirements shall require the prior approval of the Commission.
3.   The additional requirements shall be restricted to the subjects listed in Annex III. The Commission shall be notified of these additional requirements at least six months before their entry into force and shall inform the other Member States.
4.   Compliance with the additional requirements shall be specified in the Community inland navigation certificate referred to in Article 3 or, where Article 4(2) applies, in the supplementary Community inland navigation certificate. Such proof of compliance shall be recognised on Community waterways of the corresponding zone.
5.
(a)
Where application of the transitional provisions set out in Chapter 24a of Annex II would result in a reduction in existing national safety standards, a Member State may disapply those transitional provisions in respect of inland waterway passenger vessels operating on its inland waterways that are not linked to the navigable inland waterways of another Member State. In such circumstances, the Member State may require that such vessels operating on its non-linked inland waterways comply fully with the technical requirements set out in Annex II from 30 December 2008.
(b)
A Member State exercising the provision in point (a) shall inform the Commission of its decision and provide the Commission with details of the relevant national standards applying to passenger vessels operating on its inland waterways. The Commission shall inform the Member States.
(c)
Compliance with the requirements of a Member State for operating on its non-linked inland waterways shall be specified in the Community inland navigation certificate referred to in Article 3 or, where Article 4(2) applies, in the supplementary Community inland navigation certificate.
6.   Craft operating only on Zone 4 waterways shall qualify for the reduced requirements as specified in Chapter 19b of Annex II on all waterways in that zone. Compliance with those reduced requirements shall be specified in the Community inland navigation certificate referred to in Article 3.
7.   Each Member State may, after consulting the Commission, allow a reduction of the technical requirements of Annex II for craft operating exclusively on Zone 3 and 4 waterways within its territory.
Such a reduction shall be restricted to the subjects listed in Annex IV. Where the technical characteristics of a craft correspond to the reduced technical requirements, this shall be specified in the Community inland navigation certificate or, where Article 4(2) applies, in the supplementary Community inland navigation certificate.
The Commission shall be notified of the reductions of the technical requirements of Annex II at least six months before they come into force and shall inform the other Member States.
