Article 8
Issuance of Community inland navigation certificates
1.   The Community inland navigation certificate shall be issued to craft laid down as from 30 December 2008 following a technical inspection carried out prior to the craft being put into service and intended to check whether the craft complies with the technical requirements laid down in Annex II.
2.   The Community inland navigation certificate shall be issued to craft excluded from the scope of Directive 82/714/EEC, but covered by this Directive in accordance with Article 2(1) and (2), following a technical inspection which shall be carried out upon expiry of the craft's current certificate, but in any case no later than 30 December 2018, to check whether the craft complies with the technical requirements laid down in Annex II. In Member States where the validity period of the craft's current national certificate is shorter than five years, such certificate may be issued until five years after 30 December 2008.
Any failure to meet the technical requirements laid down in Annex II shall be specified in the Community inland navigation certificate. Provided that the competent authorities consider that these shortcomings do not constitute a manifest danger, the craft referred to in the first subparagraph may continue to operate until such time as those components or areas of the craft which have been certified as not meeting those requirements are replaced or altered, whereafter those components or areas shall meet the requirements of Annex II.
3.   Manifest danger within the meaning of this Article shall be presumed in particular when requirements concerning the structural soundness of the shipbuilding, the navigation or manoeuvrability or special features of the craft in accordance with Annex II are affected. Derogations as allowed for in Annex II shall not be identified as shortcomings which constitute a manifest danger.
The replacement of existing parts with identical parts or parts of an equivalent technology and design during routine repairs and maintenance shall not be considered as a replacement within the meaning of this Article.
4.   Compliance of a craft with the additional requirements referred to in Article 5(1), (2) and (3) shall, where appropriate, be checked during the technical inspections provided for in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article, or during a technical inspection carried out at the request of the vessel's owner.
