Article 6
Budget
1.   The resources for the implementation of the Facility shall be available through the Ukraine Reserve to be mobilised in the framework of the annual budgetary procedure in accordance with Article 10b of Regulation (EU, Euratom) 2020/2093, with the following indicative distribution:
(a)
31 % in the form of non-repayable financial support pursuant to Chapter III;
(b)
41 % for expenditure pursuant to Chapter IV;
(c)
26 % for expenditure pursuant to Chapter V;
(d)
2 % for expenditure pursuant to paragraph 5, which may be increased in exceptional circumstances but shall not in any event exceed 2,5 %.
The total resources made available pursuant to the first subparagraph shall be for an amount of up to EUR 17 000 000 000.
The allocation of the available resources under the first subparagraph of paragraph 1 of this Article shall take into account in particular the need to cover expenditure in accordance with Article 23.
2.   The financial support pursuant to Chapter III in the form of a loan, shall be available for an amount of up to EUR 33 000 000 000 for the period from 1 January 2024 to 31 December 2027.
3.   The sum of the resources made available pursuant to paragraphs 1 and 2 shall not exceed EUR 50 000 000 000 for the period 2024 to 2027.
4.   Additional contributions for financing the support referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article may be provided in accordance with Article 7.
5.   The resources referred to in paragraph 1, first subparagraph, point (d), and paragraph 4 may be used for technical and administrative assistance for the implementation of the Facility, such as preparatory activities, monitoring, control, audit and evaluation activities, which are required for the management of the Facility and the achievement of its objectives, in particular studies, meetings of experts, the consultations with the Ukrainian authorities, conferences, consultation of stakeholders, information and communication activities, including inclusive outreach activities, and the corporate communication of the political priorities of the Union, insofar as they are related to the objectives of this Regulation, expenses linked to IT networks focusing on information processing and exchange, corporate information technology tools, and all other technical and administrative assistance expenses incurred by the Commission for the management and costs of the Facility at headquarters and in Union delegations. Expenses may also cover the costs of other supporting activities such as quality control and monitoring of projects on the ground and the costs of peer counselling and experts for the assessment and implementation of reforms and investments.
6.   The resources not allocated or used for expenditure under paragraph 1, first subparagraph, point (d), of this Article, and under Article 23 shall be made available for other operational expenditure under paragraph 1 of this Article without prejudice to the prerogatives of the budgetary authority and subject to the third subparagraph of paragraph 1 of this Article.
