Article 40
Evaluation of the Facility
1.   The Commission shall provide to the European Parliament and the Council an independent interim evaluation report on the implementation of the Facility by 31 December 2026, and an independent ex post evaluation report by 31 December 2031.
2.   The evaluation reports referred to in paragraph 1 shall, in particular, assess the extent to which the objectives of the Facility have been achieved, the efficiency of the use of the resources provided under the Facility, the protection of the financial interests of the Union and the European added value. They shall also consider the continued relevance of all objectives and activities.
3.   Where appropriate, the Commission shall submit proposals taking into account the results of the evaluation reports referred to in paragraph 1.
4.   The ex post evaluation report shall consist of a global assessment of the Facility and shall, to the extent possible, include information on its impact in the long term.
5.   The ex post evaluation shall make use of the good practice principles of the OECD Development Assistance Committee, seeking to ascertain whether the objectives have been met and to formulate recommendations with a view to improving future activities.
The Commission shall communicate the findings and conclusions of the evaluations accompanied by its observations and follow-up, to the European Parliament, the Council and the Member States. Those evaluations may be discussed at the request of the European Parliament, the Council or the Member States. The results shall feed into the preparation of programmes and activities and resource allocation. Those evaluations and follow-up shall be made publicly available.
The Commission shall, to an appropriate extent, involve all relevant stakeholders, including beneficiaries, social partners, civil society organisations and local and regional authorities in the evaluation process of the Union’s funding provided under the Facility, and may, where appropriate, seek to undertake joint evaluations with Member States and other partners with close involvement of Ukraine.
CHAPTER VIII

FINAL PROVISIONS

