Article 11
Rules on the eligibility of persons and entities, on the origin of supply and materials and on restrictions under the Facility
1.   Participation in procurement and in grant and prize award procedures for activities financed under the Facility shall be open to international and regional organisations and to all natural persons who are nationals of, or legal persons effectively established in:
(a)
Member States, Ukraine, Western Balkan partners, Georgia and Moldova and Contracting Parties to the Agreement on the European Economic Area;
(b)
countries which provide a level of support to Ukraine comparable to that provided by the Union taking into account the size of their economy and for which reciprocal access to external assistance in Ukraine is established by the Commission.
2.   The reciprocal access referred to in paragraph 1, point (b), may be granted for a limited period of at least one year whenever a country grants eligibility on equal terms to entities from the Union and from countries eligible under the Facility.
The Commission shall decide by means of implementing acts on the reciprocal access after consulting Ukraine. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 42.
3.   All supplies and materials financed and procured under the Facility shall originate from any country referred to paragraph 1, points (a) and (b), unless those supplies and materials cannot be sourced under reasonable conditions in any of those countries. In addition, the rules on restrictions in paragraph 7 apply. The Commission shall include information on the implementation of this paragraph in the annual report referred to in Article 39(4).
4.   The eligibility rules set out in this Article shall not apply to, and shall not create nationality restrictions for, natural persons employed or otherwise legally contracted by an eligible contractor or, where applicable, subcontractor except where the nationality restrictions are based on the rules provided for in paragraph 7.
5.   For activities jointly co-financed by an entity or implemented in direct or indirect management with entities referred to in Article 62(1), first subparagraph, point (c), of Regulation (EU, Euratom) 2018/1046 or for activities implemented by Ukrainian entities under Chapter III of this Regulation, the eligibility rules of those entities or of Ukraine shall also apply in addition to the rules established under this Article, including, where applicable, the restrictions provided for under paragraph 7 of this Article and duly reflected in the financing agreements and contractual documents signed with those entities.
6.   Where additional contributions are provided in accordance with Article 7 through external assigned revenues, the eligibility rules in the agreement with the person providing the additional contribution shall apply with the rules on restrictions provided for under paragraph 7 of this Article.
7.   The eligibility rules and rules on the origin of supplies and materials as set out in paragraphs 1 and 3 and the rules on the nationality of the natural persons as set out in paragraph 4 may be restricted with regard to the nationality, geographical location or nature of the legal entities participating in procurement procedures as well as with regard to the geographical origin of supplies and materials, in the following cases:
(a)
where such restrictions are required on account of the specific nature or objectives of the activity or specific award procedure or where those restrictions are necessary for the effective implementation of the activity;
(b)
where the activity or specific award procedures affect security or public order, in particular concerning strategic assets and interests of the Union, its Member States, or Ukraine, including the protection of the integrity of digital infrastructure, communication and information systems, and related supply chains.
8.   Tender applicants and candidates from non-eligible countries may be accepted as eligible in cases of urgency or where services are unavailable in the markets of the countries or territories concerned, or in other duly substantiated cases where the application of the eligibility rules would make the realisation of an activity impossible or exceedingly difficult.
