Article 16
Principles for financing under the Ukraine Plan
1.   The Ukraine Plan shall set out the reform and investment agenda of Ukraine, integrated in an economic and fiscal policy framework, towards the achievement of the general and specific objectives set out in Article 3. The Ukraine Plan shall comprise measures for the implementation of reforms and public investment through a comprehensive and coherent package, which may also include public schemes that aim to incentivise private investments. The Ukraine Plan shall identify the qualitative and quantitative steps as referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article, which in the case of reforms and investments shall be measurable.
2.   The Facility shall provide financing under this Chapter upon satisfactory fulfilment of the precondition set out in Article 5(1), as well as conditions laid down in the Ukraine Plan, taking the form of qualitative or quantitative steps. Such conditions shall reflect the different objectives of the Facility, as set out in Article 3, and shall include conditions related to essential requirements, such as the maintenance of economic and financial stability, budget oversight and public financial management, and conditions related to the implementation of the reforms and investments set out in the Ukraine Plan.
3.   The conditions referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article shall reflect the amounts referred to in Article 6(1), first subparagraph, point (a), and (2) and relevant contributions under paragraph 4 of that Article.
4.   An amount equivalent to at least 20 % of the non-repayable financial support referred to in Article 6(1), first subparagraph, point (a), shall be allocated to the recovery, reconstruction and modernisation needs of Ukraine’s sub-national authorities, in particular local self-government, in line with Article 17.
5.   Exceptionally, measures started from 1 January 2023 onwards shall be eligible provided that they comply with the requirements set out in this Regulation. Those measures shall be duly justified and properly documented.
6.   The Ukraine Plan shall contribute to and be consistent with the relevant reform priorities identified in the context of Ukraine’s accession path, as outlined in the Commission’s Opinion on Ukraine's application for membership of the Union (the ‘Commission Opinion’) and the Analytical Report following that opinion (the ‘Analytical Report’), the Commission’s regular enlargement report and subsequent Council conclusions, and the Association Agreement including a Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Area. It shall also contribute to and be consistent with Ukraine’s nationally determined contribution under the Paris Agreement, Ukraine’s commitments under the United Nations Convention on Biological Diversity and, if available, Ukraine’s National Energy and Climate Plan.
7.   The Ukraine Plan shall respect the general principles set out in Article 4.
