Article 34
Union accession assistance and related support measures
1.   Assistance under this Chapter shall support Ukraine in attaining the objectives set out in Article 3. In particular, assistance provided under this Chapter shall aim to support Ukraine’s progressive alignment to the Union acquis with a view to future Union membership, thereby contributing to mutual stability, security, peace and prosperity. Such support shall include strengthening of the rule of law, including the independence of judiciary, democracy, the respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms, the fight against corruption, reinforcing of the effectiveness of public administration, institutional capacities, decentralisation, supporting transparency, structural reforms, sectoral policies and good governance at all levels, and contributing to the implementation of the Ukraine Plan.
2.   Assistance under this Chapter shall also be provided to ensure that capacities of stakeholders, including social partners, civil society organisations and local and regional authorities, are strengthened, including through twinning and town twinning, as well as through the promotion of peer-to-peer cooperation and programs embedded in partnerships between cities and regions in the Union and those in Ukraine, where relevant.
3.   Assistance under this Chapter shall also strengthen capacities for conflict prevention, peacebuilding and address pre- and post-crisis needs, including through, confidence-building measures and processes that promote justice, truth-seeking, comprehensive post-conflict rehabilitation for an inclusive, peaceful society, as well as collection of evidence of crimes committed during the war. Funding for initiatives and bodies involved in supporting and enforcing international justice in Ukraine may be provided under this Chapter.
4.   Assistance under this Chapter shall support the creation and strengthening of Ukrainian authorities responsible for ensuring appropriate use of funds, audit and an effective fight against mismanagement of public funding, in particular fraud, all forms of corruption including high-level corruption, conflicts of interest and irregularities incurred in relation to any amount spent to achieve the objectives of the Facility, as well as to support deoligarchisation efforts.
5.   The borrowing costs subsidy referred to in Article 23 shall be funded under this Chapter.
6.   For the years 2024 to 2027, the support under this Chapter shall fund:
(a)
the provisioning of budgetary guarantees, which is not covered by the financial envelope referred to in Article 50 of Regulation (EU) 2021/947 in accordance with the rules set out in Article 31(8) of that Regulation, for the covered external lending mandate financial liabilities in Ukraine under Article 12(1) of Decision (EU) 2022/1628 of the European Parliament and of the Council (41) related to loan amounts disbursed after 15 July 2022 of up to EUR 1,586 billion;
(b)
the interest rate subsidy for macro-financial assistance loans under:
(i)
Decision (EU) 2022/1201 of the European Parliament and of the Council (42), by way of derogation from Article 1(3) thereof;
(ii)
Decision (EU) 2022/1628, by way of derogation from Article 6(3) thereof;
(c)
by way of derogation from Article 31(1) of Regulation (EU) 2021/947, the paid-in provisioning of 9 % for financial assistance which has not yet been committed at the end of 2023, referred to in Article 11(1) of Decision (EU) 2022/1628.
