Article 64
1.   The commitments of the members of credit institutions set up as cooperative societies referred to in point (g) of Article 57, shall comprise those societies' uncalled capital, together with the legal commitments of the members of those cooperative societies to make additional non-refundable payments should the credit institution incur a loss, in which case it shall be possible to demand those payments without delay.
The joint and several commitments of borrowers in the case of credit institutions organised as funds shall be treated in the same way as the preceding items.
All such items may be included in own funds in so far as they are counted as the own funds of institutions of this category under national law.
2.   Member States shall not include in the own funds of public credit institutions guarantees which they or their local authorities extend to such entities.
3.   Member States or the competent authorities may include fixed-term cumulative preferential shares referred to in point (h) of Article 57 and subordinated loan capital referred to in that provision in own funds, if binding agreements exist under which, in the event of the bankruptcy or liquidation of the credit institution, they rank after the claims of all other creditors and are not to be repaid until all other debts outstanding at the time have been settled.
Subordinated loan capital shall fulfil the following additional criteria:
(a)
only fully paid-up funds may be taken into account;
(b)
the loans involved shall have an original maturity of at least five years, after which they may be repaid;
(c)
the extent to which they may rank as own funds shall be gradually reduced during at least the last five years before the repayment date; and
(d)
the loan agreement shall not include any clause providing that in specified circumstances, other than the winding-up of the credit institution, the debt shall become repayable before the agreed repayment date.
For the purposes of point (b) of the second subparagraph, if the maturity of the debt is not fixed, the loans involved shall be repayable only subject to five years' notice unless the loans are no longer considered as own funds or unless the prior consent of the competent authorities is specifically required for early repayment. The competent authorities may grant permission for the early repayment of such loans provided the request is made at the initiative of the issuer and the solvency of the credit institution in question is not affected.
4.   Credit institutions shall not include in own funds either the fair value reserves related to gains or losses on cash flow hedges of financial instruments measured at amortised cost, or any gains or losses on their liabilities valued at fair value that are due to changes in the credit institutions' own credit standing.
