Article 24
Type authorisation of vehicles
1.   The Agency or a national safety authority may, where appropriate, in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 21, grant vehicle type authorisations. The application for a vehicle type authorisation and information about all applications, the stages of the relevant procedures and their outcome, and, where applicable, the requests and decisions of the Board of Appeal, shall be submitted through the one-stop shop referred to in Article 12 of Regulation (EU) 2016/796.
2.   If the Agency or a national safety authority issues a vehicle authorisation for placing on the market, it shall at the same time as the applicant's request issue the vehicle type authorisation, which is related to the same area of use of the vehicle.
3.   In the event of changes to any relevant provisions in TSIs or national rules, on the basis of which an authorisation of a vehicle type has been issued, the TSI or national rule shall determine whether the vehicle type authorisation already granted remains valid or needs to be renewed. If that authorisation needs to be renewed, the checks performed by the Agency or by a national safety authority may only concern the changed rules.
4.   The Commission shall establish, by means of implementing acts, the model of declaration of conformity to type. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 51(3).
5.   The declaration of conformity to type shall be established in accordance with:
(a)
the verification procedures of the relevant TSIs; or
(b)
where TSIs do not apply, the conformity assessment procedures as defined in modules B+D, B+F and H1 of Decision No 768/2008/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (15).
6.   Where appropriate, the Commission may adopt implementing acts establishing ad hoc modules for conformity assessment. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 51(3).
7.   The authorisation of vehicle types shall be registered in the European register of authorised vehicle types referred to in Article 48.
