Article 21
Vehicle authorisation for placing on the market
1.   The applicant shall place a vehicle on the market only after having received the vehicle authorisation for placing on the market issued by the Agency in accordance with paragraphs 5 to 7 or by the national safety authority in accordance with paragraph 8.
2.   In its application for a vehicle authorisation for placing on the market, the applicant shall specify the area of use of the vehicle. The application shall include evidence that the technical compatibility between the vehicle and the network of the area of use has been checked.
3.   The application for a vehicle authorisation for placing on the market shall be accompanied by a file concerning the vehicle or vehicle type and including documentary evidence of:
(a)
the placing on the market of the mobile subsystems of which the vehicle is composed in accordance with Article 20, on the basis of the ‘EC’ declaration of verification;
(b)
the technical compatibility of the subsystems referred to in point (a) within the vehicle, established on the basis of the relevant TSIs, and where applicable, national rules;
(c)
the safe integration of the subsystems referred to in point (a) within the vehicle, established on the basis of the relevant TSIs, and where applicable, national rules, and the CSMs referred to in Article 6 of Directive (EU) 2016/798;
(d)
the technical compatibility of the vehicle with the network in the area of use referred to in paragraph 2, established on the basis of the relevant TSIs and, where applicable, national rules, registers of infrastructure and the CSM on risk assessment referred to in Article 6 of Directive (EU) 2016/798.
That application and information about all applications, the stages of the relevant procedures and their outcome, and, where applicable, the requests and decisions of the Board of Appeal, shall be submitted through the one-stop shop referred to in Article 12 of Regulation (EU) 2016/796.
Whenever tests are necessary in order to obtain documentary evidence of the technical compatibility referred to in points (b) and (d) of the first subparagraph, the national safety authorities involved may issue temporary authorisations to the applicant to use the vehicle for practical verifications on the network. The infrastructure manager, in consultation with the applicant, shall make every effort to ensure that any tests take place within three months of receipt of the applicant's request. Where appropriate, the national safety authority shall take measures to ensure that the tests take place.
4.   The Agency or, in the case of paragraph 8, the national safety authority shall issue vehicle authorisations for placing on the market or inform the applicant of its negative decision within a predetermined, reasonable time, and in any case within four months of receipt of all relevant information from the applicant. The Agency, or, in the cases provided for in paragraph 8, the national safety authority, shall apply the practical arrangements on the authorisation procedure to be established in an implementing act, as referred to in paragraph 9. Those authorisations shall allow vehicles to be placed on the Union market.
5.   The Agency shall issue vehicle authorisations for placing on the market in respect of vehicles having an area of use in one or more Member States. In order to issue such authorisations, the Agency shall:
(a)
assess the elements of the file specified in points (b), (c) and (d) of the first subparagraph of paragraph 3 in order to verify the completeness, relevance and consistency of the file in relation to the relevant TSIs; and
(b)
refer the applicant's file to the national safety authorities concerned by the intended area of use for assessment of the file in order to verify its completeness, relevance and consistency in relation to point (d) of the first subparagraph of paragraph 3 and to the elements specified in points (a), (b) and (c) of the first subparagraph of paragraph 3 in relation to the relevant national rules.
As part of the assessments pursuant to points (a) and (b) and in the case of justified doubts, the Agency or the national safety authorities may request that tests be conducted on the network. In order to facilitate those tests, the national safety authorities involved may issue temporary authorisations to the applicant to use the vehicle for tests on the network. The infrastructure manager shall make every effort to ensure that any such test takes place within three months of the request of the Agency or the national safety authority.
6.   Within one month of receipt of the applicant's request, the Agency shall inform the applicant that the file is complete or ask for relevant supplementary information, setting a reasonable deadline for the provision thereof. With regard to the completeness, relevance and consistency of the file, the Agency may also assess the elements specified in point (d) of paragraph 3.
The Agency shall take full account of the assessments under paragraph 5 before taking its decision on the issuance of the vehicle authorisation for placing on the market. The Agency shall issue the authorisation for placing on the market, or inform the applicant of its negative decision, within a predetermined, reasonable time, and in any case within four months of receipt of all relevant information.
In the event of non-application of one or more TSIs or parts of them as referred to in Article 7, the Agency shall issue the vehicle authorisation only after application of the procedure laid down in that Article.
The Agency shall take full responsibility for the authorisations it issues.
7.   When the Agency disagrees with a negative assessment carried out by one or more national safety authorities pursuant to point (b) of paragraph 5, it shall inform the authority or authorities in question, giving reasons for its disagreement. The Agency and the national safety authority or authorities shall cooperate with a view to reaching a mutually acceptable assessment. Where necessary, as decided by the Agency and the national safety authority or authorities, this process shall also involve the applicant. If no mutually acceptable assessment can be agreed on within one month after the Agency has informed the national safety authority or authorities of its disagreement, the Agency shall take its final decision unless the national safety authority or authorities have referred the matter for arbitration to the Board of Appeal established under Article 55 of Regulation (EU) 2016/796. The Board of Appeal shall decide whether to confirm the Agency's draft decision within one month of the request of the national safety authority or authorities.
Where the Board of Appeal agrees with the Agency, the Agency shall take a decision without delay.
Where the Board of Appeal agrees with the negative assessment of the national safety authority, the Agency shall issue an authorisation with an area of use excluding the parts of the network which received a negative assessment.
Where the Agency disagrees with a positive assessment of one or more national safety authorities pursuant to point (b) of paragraph 5, it shall inform the authority or authorities in question, giving reasons for its disagreement. The Agency and the national safety authority or authorities shall cooperate with a view to agreeing on a mutually acceptable assessment. Where necessary, as decided by the Agency and the national safety authority or authorities, this process shall also involve the applicant. If no mutually acceptable assessment can be agreed on within one month after the Agency has informed the national safety authority and authorities of its disagreement, the Agency shall take its final decision.
8.   Where the area of use is limited to a network or networks within one Member State only, the national safety authority of that Member State may, under its own responsibility and when the applicant so requests, issue the vehicle authorisation for placing on the market. In order to issue such authorisations, the national safety authority shall assess the file in relation to the elements specified in paragraph 3 and in accordance with the procedures to be established in the implementing act adopted pursuant to paragraph 9. Within one month of receipt of the request of the applicant, the national safety authority shall inform the applicant that the file is complete or ask for relevant supplementary information. The authorisation shall also be valid without extension of the area of use for vehicles travelling to stations in neighbouring Member States with similar network characteristics, when those stations are close to the border, following consultation of the competent national safety authorities. This consultation may be carried out on a case-by-case basis or set out in a cross-border agreement between national safety authorities.
If the area of use is limited to the territory of one Member State and in the event of non-application of one or more TSIs or parts of them as referred to in Article 7, the national safety authority shall issue the vehicle authorisation only after application of the procedure laid down in that Article.
The national safety authority shall take full responsibility for the authorisations it issues.
9.   By 16 June 2018, the Commission shall adopt by means of implementing acts practical arrangements specifying:
(a)
how the requirements for the vehicle authorisation for placing on the market and for vehicle type authorisation laid down in this Article shall be fulfilled by the applicant and listing the documents required;
(b)
the details of the authorisation process, such as procedural stages and timeframes for each stage of the process;
(c)
how the requirements laid down in this Article shall be complied with by the Agency and the national safety authority through the different stages of the application and authorisation process including in the assessment of applicants' files.
Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 51(3). They shall take into account the experience gained during the preparation of the cooperation agreements referred to in paragraph 14 of this Article.
10.   Vehicle authorisations for placing on the market shall state:
(a)
the area(s) of use;
(b)
the values of the parameters set out in the TSIs and, where applicable, in the national rules, for checking the technical compatibility between the vehicle and the area of use;
(c)
the vehicle's compliance with the relevant TSIs and sets of national rules, relating to the parameters referred to in point (b);
(d)
the conditions for use of the vehicle and other restrictions.
11.   Any decision refusing the vehicle authorisation for placing on the market or excluding part of the network in accordance with a negative assessment as referred to in paragraph 7 shall be duly substantiated. The applicant may, within a period of one month from receipt of the negative decision, request that the Agency or the national safety authority, as appropriate, review the decision. The Agency or the national safety authority shall have two months from the date of receipt of the request for review in which to confirm or reverse its decision.
If the negative decision of the Agency is confirmed, the applicant may bring an appeal before the Board of Appeal designated under Article 55 of Regulation (EU) 2016/796.
If the negative decision of a national safety authority is confirmed, the applicant may bring an appeal before an appeal body in accordance with the national law. Member States may designate the regulatory body referred to in Article 55 of Directive 2012/34/EU for the purpose of this appeal procedure. In that case, Article 18(3) of Directive (EU) 2016/798 shall apply.
12.   In the event of renewal or upgrading of existing vehicles which already have a vehicle authorisation for placing on the market, a new vehicle authorisation for placing on the market shall be required if:
(a)
changes are made to the values of the parameters referred to in point (b) of paragraph 10 which are outside the range of acceptable parameters as defined in the TSIs;
(b)
the overall safety level of the vehicle concerned may be adversely affected by the works envisaged; or
(c)
it is required by the relevant TSIs.
13.   Where the applicant wishes to extend the area of use of a vehicle which has already been authorised, it shall supplement the file with the relevant documents referred to in paragraph 3 concerning the additional area of use. The applicant shall submit the file to the Agency, which shall, after following the procedures laid down in paragraphs 4 to 7, issue an updated authorisation covering the extended area of use.
If the applicant has received a vehicle authorisation in accordance with paragraph 8 and wishes to extend the area of use within that Member State, it shall supplement the file with the relevant documents referred to in paragraph 3 concerning the additional area of use. It shall submit the file to the national safety authority which shall, after following the procedures laid down in paragraph 8, issue an updated authorisation covering the extended area of use.
14.   For the purposes of paragraphs 5 and 6 of this Article, the Agency shall conclude cooperation agreements with national safety authorities in accordance with Article 76 of Regulation (EU) 2016/796. Those agreements may be specific or framework agreements, and may involve one or more national safety authorities. They shall contain a detailed description of tasks and conditions for deliverables, the time limits applying to their delivery, and an apportionment of the fees payable by the applicant. They may also include specific cooperation arrangements in the case of networks requiring specific expertise for geographical or historical reasons, with a view to reducing administrative burdens and costs to the applicant. Where such networks are isolated from the rest of the Union rail system, such specific cooperation arrangements may include the possibility of contracting tasks to the relevant national safety authorities when this is necessary in order to ensure the efficient and proportionate allocation of resources for authorisation. Those agreements shall be in place before the Agency shall undertake the authorisation tasks in accordance with Article 54(4) of this Directive.
15.   In the case of those Member States whose rail networks have a track gauge that is different from that of the main rail network within the Union and share identical technical and operational requirements with neighbouring third countries, in addition to the cooperation agreements referred to in paragraph 14, all national safety authorities concerned in those Member States shall conclude with the Agency a multilateral agreement with a view to defining the conditions under which a vehicle authorisation issued in one of those Member States is also valid for the other Member States concerned.
16.   This Article shall not apply to freight wagons or passenger coaches which are in shared use with third countries, the track gauge of which is different from that of the main rail network within the Union and authorised in accordance with a different vehicle authorisation procedure. The rules governing the procedure for authorisation of such vehicles shall be published and notified to the Commission. The conformity of those vehicles with the essential requirements of this Directive shall be ensured by the railway undertaking concerned in the context of its safety management system. The Commission, on the basis of the report by the Agency may give an opinion on whether such rules are compliant with the objectives of this Directive. If such rules are not compliant, the Member States concerned and the Commission may cooperate in order to lay down appropriate actions to be taken, involving relevant international bodies, if necessary.
17.   A Member State may decide not to apply this Article to locomotives or self-propelling trains arriving from third countries and intended to run until a station that is situated close to the border in its territory and designated for cross-border operations. The conformity of such vehicles with the essential requirements of this Directive shall be ensured by the railway undertaking concerned in the context of its safety management system and, where relevant, in accordance with Article 10(9) of Directive (EU) 2016/798.
