Article 30
Conformity assessment bodies
1.   For the purposes of notification, a conformity assessment body shall meet the requirements laid down in paragraphs 2 to 7 of this Article and in Articles 31 and 32.
2.   A conformity assessment body shall be established under national law and shall have legal personality.
3.   A conformity assessment body shall be capable of carrying out all the conformity assessment tasks assigned to it by the relevant TSI and in relation to which it has been notified, whether those tasks are carried out by the conformity assessment body itself or on its behalf and under its responsibility.
At all times and for each conformity assessment procedure and each kind or category of product in relation to which it has been notified, a conformity assessment body shall have at its disposal:
(a)
the necessary personnel with technical knowledge and sufficient and appropriate experience to perform the conformity assessment tasks;
(b)
the relevant descriptions of procedures in accordance with which conformity assessment is to be carried out, ensuring the transparency and the ability to apply those procedures. It shall have in place appropriate policies and procedures that distinguish between the tasks it carries out as a notified conformity assessment body and other activities;
(c)
the proper procedures for the performance of activities which take due account of the size of an undertaking, the sector in which it operates, its structure, the degree of complexity of the product technology in question and the mass or serial nature of the production process.
It shall have the means necessary to perform in an appropriate manner the technical and administrative tasks connected with the conformity assessment activities and shall have access to all necessary equipment or facilities.
4.   Conformity assessment bodies shall take out liability insurance unless liability is assumed by the State in accordance with national law, or unless the Member State itself is directly responsible for the conformity assessment.
5.   The personnel of a conformity assessment body shall observe professional secrecy with regard to all information obtained in carrying out their tasks under the relevant TSI or any provision of national law giving effect to it, except in relation to the competent authorities of the Member State in which its activities are carried out. Proprietary rights shall be protected.
6.   Conformity assessment bodies shall participate in, or ensure that their assessment personnel are informed of, the relevant standardisation activities and the activities of the notified conformity assessment bodies' coordination group established under the relevant Union law, and shall apply as general guidance the administrative decisions and documents produced as a result of the work of that group.
7.   Conformity assessment bodies that are notified for trackside and/or on-board control-command and signalling subsystems shall participate in, or shall ensure that their assessment personnel are informed of, the activities of the ERTMS group referred to in Article 29 of Regulation (EU) 2016/796. They shall follow the guidelines produced as a result of the work of that group. In the event that they consider it inappropriate or impossible to apply them, the conformity assessment bodies concerned shall submit their observations for discussion to the ERTMS group for the continuous improvement of the guidelines.
