Article 7
1. Member States shall ensure that provision is made in the licences or permits referred to in Article 4 for procedures relating to malfunction or breakdown of the abatement equipment. In case of a breakdown the competent authority shall in particular require the operator to reduce or close down operations if a return to normal operation is not achieved within 24 hours, or to operate the plant using low polluting fuels. In any case the competent authority shall be notified within 48 hours. In no circumstances shall the cumulative duration of unabated operation in any twelve-month period exceed 120 hours. The competent authority may allow exceptions to the limits of 24 hours and 120 hours above in cases where, in their judgement:
(a) there is an overriding need to maintain energy supplies, or
(b) the plant with the breakdown would be replaced for a limited period by another plant which would cause an overall increase in emissions.
2. The competent authority may allow a suspension for a maximum of six months from the obligation to comply with the emission limit values provided for in Article 4 for sulphur dioxide in respect of a plant which to this end normally uses low-sulphur fuel, in cases where the operator is unable to comply with these limit values because of an interruption in the supply of low-sulphur fuel resulting from a serious shortage. The Commission shall immediately be informed of such cases.
3. The competent authority may allow a derogation from the obligation to comply with the emission limit values provided for in Article 4 in cases where a plant which normally uses only gaseous fuel, and which would otherwise need to be equipped with a waste gas purification facility, has to resort exceptionally, and for a period not exceeding 10 days except where there is an overriding need to maintain energy supplies, to the use of other fuels because of a sudden interruption in the supply of gas. The competent authority shall immediately be informed of each specific case as it arises. Member States shall inform the Commission immediately of the cases referred to in this paragraph.

