Article 23
Authorised representative
1.   Member States shall require that a company referred to in Article 2(2) operating in a Member State designates as its authorised representative a natural or legal person that is established or domiciled in one of the Member States where it operates. The designation shall be valid when confirmed as accepted by the authorised representative.
2.   Member States shall require that the authorised representative or the company notifies the name, address, email address and telephone number of the authorised representative to a supervisory authority in the Member State where the authorised representative is domiciled or established and, where it is different, the competent supervisory authority, as specified in Article 24(3). Member States shall ensure that the authorised representative is obliged to provide, upon request, a copy of the designation in an official language of a Member State to any of the supervisory authorities.
3.   Member States shall require that the authorised representative or the company informs a supervisory authority in the Member State where the authorised representative is domiciled or established and, where it is different, the competent supervisory authority, as specified in Article 24(3), that the company is a company referred to in Article 2(2).
4.   Member States shall require that each company empowers its authorised representative to receive communications from supervisory authorities on all matters necessary for compliance with and enforcement of provisions of national law transposing this Directive. Companies shall be required to provide their authorised representative with the necessary powers and resources to cooperate with supervisory authorities.
5.   When a company referred to in Article 2(2) fails to comply with the obligations laid down in this Article, all Member States in which that company operates shall be competent to enforce the fulfilment of such obligations in accordance with their national law. A Member State that intends to enforce the obligations laid down in this Article shall notify the supervisory authorities through the European Network of Supervisory Authorities set up under Article 28 so that other Member States do not enforce them.
