Article 19
Guidelines
1.   In order to provide support to companies or to Member State authorities on how companies should fulfil their due diligence obligations in a practical manner, and to provide support to stakeholders, the Commission, in consultation with Member States and stakeholders, the European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights, the European Environment Agency, the European Labour Authority, and where appropriate with international organisations and other bodies having expertise in due diligence, shall issue guidelines, including general guidelines and sector-specific guidelines or guidelines for specific adverse impacts.
2.   The guidelines to be issued pursuant to paragraph 1 shall include:
(a)
guidance and best practices on how to conduct due diligence in accordance with the obligations laid down in Articles 5 to 16, particularly, the identification process pursuant to Article 8, the prioritisation of impacts pursuant to Article 9, appropriate measures to adapt purchasing practices pursuant to Article 10(2) and Article 11(3), responsible disengagement pursuant to Article 10(6) and Article 11(7), appropriate measures for remediation pursuant to Article 12, and on how to identify and engage with stakeholders pursuant to Article 13, including through the notification mechanism and complaints procedure established in Article 14;
(b)
practical guidance on the transition plan as referred to in Article 22;
(c)
sector-specific guidance;
(d)
guidance on the assessment of company-level, business operations, geographic and contextual, product and service, and sectoral risk factors, including those associated with conflict-affected and high-risk areas;
(e)
references to data and information sources available for the compliance with the obligations provided for in this Directive, and to digital tools and technologies that could facilitate and support compliance;
(f)
information on how to share resources and information among companies and other legal entities for the purpose of compliance with the provisions of national law adopted pursuant to this Directive, in a manner that is in accordance with the protection of trade secrets pursuant to Article 5(3) and the protection from potential retaliation and retribution as provided for in Article 13(5);
(g)
information for stakeholders and their representatives on how to engage throughout the due diligence process.
3.   The guidelines referred to in paragraph 2, points (a), (d), and (e), shall be made available by 26 January 2027. The guidelines in paragraph 2, points (b), (f) and (g), shall be made available by 26 July 2027.
4.   The guidelines referred to in this Article shall be made available in all the official languages of the Union. The Commission shall periodically review the guidelines and adapt them where appropriate.
