Article 16
Communicating
1.   Without prejudice to the exemption provided for in paragraph 2 of this Article, Member States shall ensure that companies report on the matters covered by this Directive by publishing on their website an annual statement. That annual statement shall be published:
(a)
in at least one of the official languages of the Union used in the Member State of the supervisory authority designated pursuant to Article 24 and, where different, in a language that is customary in the sphere of international business;
(b)
within a reasonable period of time, but no later than 12 months after the balance sheet date of the financial year for which the statement is drawn up, or, for companies voluntarily reporting in accordance with Directive 2013/34/EU, by the date of publication of the annual financial statements.
In the case of a company formed in accordance with the law of a third country, the statement shall also include the information required pursuant to Article 23(2) regarding the company’s authorised representative.
2.   Paragraph 1 of this Article shall not apply to companies that are subject to sustainability reporting requirements in accordance with Article 19a, 29a or 40a of Directive 2013/34/EU, including those that are exempted in accordance with Article 19a(9) or Article 29a(8) of that Directive.
3.   By 31 March 2027, the Commission shall adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 34 in order to supplement this Directive by laying down the content and criteria for the reporting under paragraph 1, specifying, in particular, sufficiently detailed information on the description of due diligence, actual and potential adverse impacts identified, and appropriate measures taken with respect to those impacts. In preparing those delegated acts, the Commission shall take due account of, and align them as appropriate with, the sustainability reporting standards adopted pursuant to Articles 29b and 40b of Directive 2013/34/EU.
When adopting the delegated acts referred to in the first subparagraph, the Commission shall ensure that there is no duplication in reporting requirements for companies referred to in Article 3(1)point (a)(iii), that are subject to reporting requirements under Article 4 of Regulation (EU) 2019/2088, while maintaining in full the minimum obligations stipulated in this Directive.
