Article 5
Due diligence
1.   Member States shall ensure that companies conduct risk-based human rights and environmental due diligence as laid down in Articles 7 to 16 (‘due diligence’) by carrying out the following actions:
(a)
integrating due diligence into their policies and risk management systems in accordance with Article 7;
(b)
identifying and assessing actual or potential adverse impacts in accordance with Article 8 and, where necessary, prioritising actual and potential adverse impacts in accordance with Article 9;
(c)
preventing and mitigating potential adverse impacts, and bringing actual adverse impacts to an end and minimising their extent in accordance with Articles 10 and 11;
(d)
providing remediation for actual adverse impacts in accordance with Article 12;
(e)
carrying out meaningful engagement with stakeholders in accordance with Article 13;
(f)
establishing and maintaining a notification mechanism and a complaints procedure in accordance with Article 14;
(g)
monitoring the effectiveness of their due diligence policy and measures in accordance with Article 15;
(h)
publicly communicating on due diligence in accordance with Article 16.
2.   Member States shall ensure that, for the purposes of due diligence, companies are entitled to share resources and information within their respective groups of companies and with other legal entities.
3.   Member States shall ensure that a business partner is not obliged to disclose to a company that is complying with the obligations resulting from this Directive information that is a trade secret, as defined in Article 2, point (1), of Directive (EU) 2016/943, without prejudice to the disclosure of the identity of direct and indirect business partners, or essential information needed to identify actual or potential adverse impacts, where necessary and duly justified for the company’s compliance with due diligence obligations. This shall be without prejudice to the possibility for the business partners to protect their trade secrets through the mechanisms established in Directive (EU) 2016/943. Business partners shall never be obliged to disclose classified information or other information the disclosure of which would cause a risk to the essential interests of a state’s security.
4.   Member States shall require companies to retain documentation regarding the actions carried out to fulfil their due diligence obligations for the purpose of demonstrating compliance, including supporting evidence, for at least 5 years from the moment when such documentation was produced or obtained.
Where, upon expiry of the retention period provided for in the first subparagraph, there are ongoing judicial or administrative proceedings under this Directive, the retention period shall be extended until the conclusion of the matter.
