Article 20
Accompanying measures
1.   Member States shall, in order to provide information and support to companies and their business partners and to stakeholders, set up and operate individually or jointly dedicated websites, platforms or portals. Specific consideration shall be given, in that respect, to the SMEs that are present in the chains of activities of companies. Those websites, platforms or portals shall, in particular, give access to:
(a)
the content and criteria for reporting as laid down by the Commission in the delegated acts adopted pursuant to Article 16(3);
(b)
the Commission’s guidance about voluntary model contractual clauses as provided for in Article 18 and the guidelines it issues pursuant to Article 19;
(c)
the single helpdesk provided for in Article 21; and
(d)
information for stakeholders and their representatives on how to engage throughout the due diligence process.
2.   Without prejudice to State aid rules, Member States may financially support SMEs. Member States may also provide support to stakeholders for the purpose of facilitating the exercise of rights laid down in this Directive.
3.   The Commission may complement Member State support measures, building on existing Union action to support due diligence in the Union and in third countries, and may devise new measures, including facilitation of industry or multi-stakeholder initiatives to help companies fulfil their obligations.
4.   Without prejudice to Articles 25, 26 and 29, companies may participate in industry and multi-stakeholder initiatives to support the implementation of the obligations referred to in Articles 7 to 16 to the extent that such initiatives are appropriate to support the fulfilment of those obligations. In particular, companies may, after having assessed their appropriateness, make use of or join relevant risk analysis carried out by industry or multi-stakeholder initiatives or by members of those initiatives and may take or join effective appropriate measures through such initiatives. When doing so, companies shall monitor the effectiveness of such measures and, continue to take appropriate measures where necessary to ensure the fulfilment of their obligations.
The Commission and the Member States may facilitate the dissemination of information on such initiatives and their outcome. The Commission, in collaboration with Member States, shall issue guidance setting out fitness criteria and a methodology for companies to assess the fitness of industry and multi-stakeholder initiatives.
5.   Without prejudice to Articles 25, 26 and 29, companies may use independent third-party verification on and from companies in their chains of activities to support the implementation of due diligence obligations to the extent that such verification is appropriate to support the fulfilment of the relevant obligations. Independent third-party verification may be carried out by other companies or by an industry or multi-stakeholder initiative. Independent third-party verifiers shall act with objectivity and complete independence from the company, be free from any conflicts of interest, remain free from external influence, whether direct or indirect, and shall refrain from any action incompatible with their independence. Depending on the nature of the adverse impact, they shall have experience and competence in environmental or human rights matters and shall be accountable for the quality and reliability of the verification they carry out.
The Commission, in collaboration with Member States, shall issue guidance setting out fitness criteria and a methodology for companies to assess the fitness of third-party verifiers, and guidance for monitoring the accuracy, effectiveness and integrity of third-party verification.
