Article 5
Bodies of the EIT and the Member State Representatives Group
1.   The bodies of the EIT shall comprise those set out in this paragraph.
A Governing Board shall be composed of high-level members with proven experience in the fields of higher education, research, innovation or business. The Governing Board shall be responsible for steering and monitoring the activities of the EIT, for the selection, designation, financing, monitoring and evaluation of the KICs, including taking appropriate corrective measures in the event of underperformance of the KICs, and other strategic decisions. The selection of the Governing Board shall take into account criteria concerning gender and geographical balance. The Governing Board shall elect a Chairperson from among its members.
An Executive Committee shall be composed of selected members representing all three components of the knowledge triangle and the Chairperson of the Governing Board. The Executive Committee shall assist the Governing Board in the performance of its tasks and shall prepare the meetings of the Governing Board in cooperation with the Director.
A Director shall be appointed by the Governing Board. The Director shall act as the legal representative of the EIT and shall be responsible for the implementation of the Governing Board’s decisions, and the EIT’s operations and day-to-day management.
An Internal Auditing Function shall operate in complete independence and in compliance with the relevant international standards. The Internal Auditing Function shall advise the Governing Board and the Director on financial and administrative management and control structures within the EIT, on the organisation of financial links with the KICs and on any other subject requested by the Governing Board.
2.   Detailed provisions regarding the bodies of the EIT are provided for in the Statutes of the EIT, which are set out in Annex I.
3.   The Member State Representatives Group (MSRG) shall be established.
The MSRG shall be composed of one representative from each Member State and each associated country.
The MSRG shall advise the Governing Board and the Director:
(a)
on the extension or termination of the EIT’s partnership agreements with the KICs, as referred to in point 6 of Section 3 of Annex I;
(b)
on the conclusion of a memorandum of cooperation with each KIC, as referred to in point 6 of Section 3 of Annex I; and
(c)
on strategically important issues to the EIT other than those referred to in points (a) and (b), sharing experience with regard thereto.
The MSRG shall also advise and share experience with the KICs.
The MSRG shall be regularly informed of the performance, achievements and activities of the EIT and the KICs, the results of their monitoring and evaluation, and their performance indicators and corrective measures. The MSRG shall provide its opinion in regard thereto.
The MSRG shall facilitate appropriate synergies and complementarities between EIT and KIC activities with national programmes and initiatives, including the potential national co-financing of KIC activities.
