Article 18
Financing of the KICs
1.   The KICs shall be financed, in particular, from the following sources:
(a)
contributions from partner organisations, forming a substantial source of funding;
(b)
voluntary contributions from Member States, associated countries or other third countries or public authorities within those Member States or countries;
(c)
contributions from international bodies or institutions;
(d)
revenue generated by the KICs’ own assets and activities and royalties from intellectual property rights;
(e)
capital endowments;
(f)
bequests, donations and contributions from individuals, institutions, foundations or any other bodies established under national law;
(g)
the financial contribution from the EIT;
(h)
financial instruments, including those funded from the general budget of the Union.
2.   The conditions for accessing the financial contribution from the EIT shall be established in the financial rules of the EIT referred to in Article 23(1).
3.   Budgetary commitments for actions extending over more than one financial year may be broken down over several years into annual instalments, subject to adequate monitoring of estimated financial needs of the KICs to be established on an annual basis.
4.   The EIT financial contribution to the KICs may cover up to 100 % of the total eligible costs of KIC added-value activities in the initial stages of a KIC’s life cycle. Such a contribution shall gradually decrease over time in accordance with the funding rates set in the SIA.
5.   The KICs and their partner organisations may apply for Union funding, in particular in the framework of Union programmes and funds, in accordance with the relevant rules. Such funding shall not cover costs already funded under another Union programme.
6.   Contributions from partner organisations to the financing of the KICs shall be determined in accordance with the funding rates referred to in paragraph 4 and reflect the KICs’ strategy for achieving financial sustainability.
7.   The EIT shall establish a performance-based allocation mechanism for granting its financial contribution to the KICs. It shall include assessing the KICs’ business plans and performance as measured by continuous monitoring in accordance with Article 10 and as set out in the SIA.
