Article 17
Transparency and access to documents
1.   The EIT and the KICs shall ensure that their activities are conducted with a high level of transparency. In particular, the EIT and the KICs shall set up an accessible, free website that provides information about their activities and the opportunities they offer, in particular with regard to open calls.
2.   The EIT and the KICs shall make available detailed information on calls for proposals issued by them, including the information on their evaluation processes and results from those calls for proposals. That information shall be made available in a timely, searchable and traceable manner in the relevant common online databases of Union-funded research and innovation projects, in accordance with Regulation (EU) 2021/695.
3.   Before issuing calls for proposals for the selection of the KICs, the EIT shall make public its rules of procedure, its specific financial rules referred to in Article 23(1) and the criteria for the selection of the KICs referred to in Article 9.
4.   The EIT shall make public without delay its single programming document and consolidated annual activity report referred to in Article 19.
5.   Without prejudice to paragraphs 6 and 7, the EIT shall not divulge to third parties confidential information it has received for which confidential treatment has been requested and is justified.
6.   The members of the EIT bodies shall be subject to the confidentiality requirement referred to in Article 339 TFEU.
The information gathered by the EIT in accordance with this Regulation shall be subject to Regulation (EU) 2018/1725 of the European Parliament and of the Council (11).
7.   Regulation (EC) No 1049/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council (12) shall apply to the documents held by the EIT.
8.   Council Regulation No 1 (13) shall apply to the EIT. The translation services required for the functioning of the EIT shall be provided by the Translation Centre for the bodies of the European Union, set up by Council Regulation (EC) No 2965/94 (14).
