Article 20
Monitoring and evaluation of the EIT
1.   The EIT shall ensure that its activities, including those managed through the KICs, shall be subject to continuous and systematic monitoring and periodic independent evaluation in accordance with its financial rules, to ensure both the highest quality of outcome, scientific excellence and the most efficient use of resources. The outcomes of the monitoring and of the evaluations shall be made public.
2.   The Commission, with the assistance of independent external experts and taking into account the views of stakeholders, shall carry out, in a timely manner, an interim and a final evaluation of the EIT and the KICs. Those evaluations shall feed into the Horizon Europe evaluations provided for in Article 52 of Regulation (EU) 2021/695.
Those evaluations shall examine how the EIT fulfils its mission and objectives and cover activities of the EIT and the KICs. They shall assess the Union added value of the EIT, the impact across the Union and the impact of the RIS activities, openness, effectiveness, efficiency and relevance of the EIT activities pursued and their consistency and complementarity with relevant Union and national policies, including the synergies with other parts of Horizon Europe, in particular the other European Partnerships and missions and the EIC.
The interim evaluation shall also assess, inter alia, the result and impacts of the pilot higher education initiative, the effectiveness of the KICs’ financial sustainability strategies and the collaboration between the EIT and implementing bodies under Pillar III ‘Innovative Europe’ of Horizon Europe. In that respect, the EIT evaluations shall feed into Horizon Europe evaluations, also in view of a systematic assessment of the Pillar III ‘Innovative Europe’ of Horizon Europe, in particular with respect to the one-stop shop for innovation.
3.   The Commission may carry out further evaluations of themes or topics of strategic relevance, with the assistance of independent external experts selected on the basis of a transparent process, to examine the progress made by the EIT towards the objectives set, identify the factors contributing to the implementation of the activities and identify best practices. By carrying out those further evaluations, the Commission shall fully consider the administrative burden on the EIT and the KICs.
4.   The Commission shall communicate the results of the evaluations, accompanied by its observations, to the European Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions. The Governing Board shall take due account of the findings of evaluations in carrying out the programmes and operations of the EIT.
