Article 6
Obligations of manufacturers
1.   When placing their products on the market or using them for their own purposes, manufacturers shall ensure that they have been designed and manufactured in accordance with the essential health and safety requirements set out in Annex II.
2.   Manufacturers shall draw up the technical documentation referred to in Annexes III to IX and carry out the relevant conformity assessment procedure referred to in Article 13 or have it carried out.
Where compliance of a product, other than a component, with the applicable requirements has been demonstrated by that procedure, manufacturers shall draw up an EU declaration of conformity and affix the CE marking.
Where compliance of a component with the applicable requirements has been demonstrated by the relevant conformity assessment procedure, manufacturers shall draw up a written attestation of conformity as referred to in Article 13(3).
Manufacturers shall ensure that each product is accompanied by a copy of the EU declaration of conformity or of the attestation of conformity, as appropriate. However, where a large number of products are delivered to a single user, the batch or consignment concerned may be accompanied by a single copy.
3.   Manufacturers shall keep the technical documentation and the EU declaration of conformity or, where applicable, the attestation of conformity for 10 years after the product has been placed on the market.
4.   Manufacturers shall ensure that procedures are in place for series production to remain in conformity with this Directive. Changes in a product design or characteristics and changes in the harmonised standards or in other technical specifications by reference to which conformity of a product is declared shall be adequately taken into account.
When deemed appropriate with regard to the risks presented by a product, manufacturers shall, to protect the health and safety of end-users, carry out sample testing of products made available on the market, investigate, and, if necessary, keep a register of complaints, of non-conforming products and product recalls, and shall keep distributors informed of any such monitoring.
5.   Manufacturers shall ensure that products which they have placed on the market bear a type, batch or serial number or other element allowing their identification, or, where the size or nature of the product does not allow it, that the required information is provided on the packaging or in a document accompanying the product.
6.   Manufacturers shall ensure that products, other than components, which they have placed on the market bear the specific marking of explosion protection and, where applicable, the other markings and information referred to in point 1.0.5 of Annex II.
7.   Manufacturers shall indicate, on the product, their name, registered trade name or registered trade mark and the postal address at which they can be contacted or, where that is not possible, on its packaging or in a document accompanying the product. The address shall indicate a single point at which the manufacturer can be contacted. The contact details shall be in a language easily understood by end-users and market surveillance authorities.
8.   Manufacturers shall ensure that the product is accompanied by instructions and safety information in a language which can be easily understood by end-users, as determined by the Member State concerned. Such instructions and safety information, as well as any labelling, shall be clear, understandable and intelligible.
9.   Manufacturers who consider or have reason to believe that a product which they have placed on the market is not in conformity with this Directive shall immediately take the corrective measures necessary to bring that product into conformity, to withdraw it or recall it, if appropriate. Furthermore, where the product presents a risk, manufacturers shall immediately inform the competent national authorities of the Member States in which they made the product available on the market to that effect, giving details, in particular, of the non-compliance and of any corrective measures taken.
10.   Manufacturers shall, further to a reasoned request from a competent national authority, provide it with all the information and documentation in paper or electronic form necessary to demonstrate the conformity of the product with this Directive, in a language which can be easily understood by that authority. They shall cooperate with that authority, at its request, on any action taken to eliminate the risks posed by products which they have placed on the market.
