Article 3
Programme objectives
1.   The general objective of the Programme is to support, through lifelong learning, the educational, professional and personal development of people in the fields of education and training, youth and sport, in Europe and beyond, thereby contributing to sustainable growth, quality jobs and social cohesion, to driving innovation and to strengthening European identity and active citizenship. The Programme shall be a key instrument for building a European Education Area, supporting the implementation of European strategic cooperation in the field of education and training, including its underlying sectoral agendas, advancing youth policy cooperation under the 2019-2027 European Union Youth Strategy and developing the European dimension in sport.
2.   The Programme has the specific objectives to promote:
(a)
the learning mobility of individuals and groups, and cooperation, quality, inclusion and equity, excellence, creativity and innovation at the level of organisations and policies in the field of education and training;
(b)
non-formal and informal learning mobility and active participation among young people, and cooperation, quality, inclusion, creativity and innovation at the level of organisations and policies in the field of youth;
(c)
the learning mobility of sport staff, and cooperation, quality, inclusion, creativity and innovation at the level of sport organisations and sport policies.
3.   The Programme objectives shall be pursued through the following three key actions which mainly have either a transnational or an international character:
(a)
learning mobility (‘key action 1’);
(b)
cooperation among organisations and institutions (‘key action 2’); and
(c)
support to policy development and cooperation (‘key action 3’).
The Programme objectives shall also be pursued through Jean Monnet actions as set out in Article 8.
The actions supported under the Programme are set out in Chapters II (education and training), III (youth) and IV (sport). The description of those actions is set out in Annex I. The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 33 to amend that Annex by adding to the description of the actions, where necessary, in order to adapt to developments in the relevant fields.
