Article 28
European Commission
1.   On the basis of the compliance requirements for national agencies referred to in Article 26(3), the Commission shall review the national management and control systems, in particular on the basis of the ex ante compliance assessment provided to it by the national authority, the national agency’s yearly management declaration and the opinion of the independent audit body thereon, taking due account of the yearly information provided by the national authority on its monitoring and supervision activities with regard to the Programme.
2.   Within two months of receipt from the national authority of the ex ante compliance assessment referred to in Article 26(3), the Commission shall accept, conditionally accept or reject the designation of the national agency. The Commission shall not enter into a contractual relationship with the national agency until it has accepted the ex ante compliance assessment. In the event of conditional acceptance, the Commission may apply proportionate precautionary measures to its contractual relationship with the national agency.
3.   Each year, the Commission shall make the following Programme funds available to the national agency:
(a)
funds for grant support in the Member State concerned for the Programme actions the management of which is entrusted to the national agency;
(b)
a financial contribution in support of the national agency’s Programme management tasks, which shall be established on the basis of the amount of Union funds for grant support entrusted to the national agency;
(c)
if relevant, additional funds for measures under point (d) of Article 7, point (d) of Article 11 and point (c) of Article 14.
4.   The Commission shall set the requirements for the national agency’s work programme. The Commission shall not make Programme funds available to the national agency until the Commission has formally approved the national agency’s work programme.
5.   After assessing the yearly management declaration and the opinion of the independent audit body thereon, the Commission shall address its opinion and observations thereon to the national agency and the national authority.
6.   In the event that the Commission cannot accept the yearly management declaration or the independent audit opinion thereon, or in the event of unsatisfactory implementation by the national agency of the Commission’s observations, the Commission may implement any precautionary and corrective measures necessary to safeguard the Union’s financial interests in accordance with Article 131 of the Financial Regulation.
7.   The Commission, in cooperation with the national agencies, shall ensure that procedures put in place to implement the Programme are consistent and simple and that information is of high quality. In that regard, regular meetings shall be organised with the network of national agencies in order to ensure consistent implementation of the Programme across all Member States and all third countries associated to the Programme.
8.   The Commission shall ensure that the information technology systems necessary to implement the Programme objectives laid down in Article 3, in particular under indirect management, are developed in an appropriate and timely manner and in such a way as to provide easy access and to be user-friendly. The Programme shall support the development, operation and maintenance of such information technology systems.
