Article 8
Supply standard
1.   The Competent Authority shall require the natural gas undertakings, that it identifies, to take measures to ensure gas supply to the protected customers of the Member State in the following cases:
(a)
extreme temperatures during a 7-day peak period occurring with a statistical probability of once in 20 years;
(b)
any period of at least 30 days of exceptionally high gas demand, occurring with a statistical probability of once in 20 years; and
(c)
for a period of at least 30 days in case of the disruption of the single largest gas infrastructure under average winter conditions.
The Competent Authority shall identify the natural gas undertakings referred to in the first subparagraph by 3 June 2012 at the latest.
2.   Any increased supply standard going beyond the 30-day period referred to in points (b) and (c) of paragraph 1 or any additional obligation imposed for reasons of security of gas supply shall be based on the risk assessment referred to in Article 9, shall be reflected in the Preventive Action Plan and shall:
(a)
comply with Article 3(6);
(b)
not unduly distort competition or hamper the functioning of the internal market in gas;
(c)
not impact negatively on the ability of any other Member State to supply its protected customers in accordance with this Article in the event of a national, Union or regional emergency; and
(d)
comply with the criteria specified in Article 11(5) in the event of a Union or regional emergency.
In a spirit of solidarity, the Competent Authority shall identify in the Preventive Action Plan and the Emergency Plan how any increased supply standard or additional obligation imposed on natural gas undertakings may be temporarily reduced in the event of a Union or regional emergency.
3.   After the periods defined by the Competent Authority in accordance with paragraphs 1 and 2, or under more severe conditions than those defined in paragraph 1, the Competent Authority and natural gas undertakings shall endeavour to maintain, as far as possible, the gas supply, in particular for protected customers.
4.   The obligations imposed on natural gas undertakings for the fulfilment of the supply standards laid down in this Article shall be non-discriminatory and shall not impose an undue burden on those undertakings.
5.   Natural gas undertakings shall be allowed to meet these obligations at a regional or Union level, where appropriate. The Competent Authority shall not require the standards laid down in this Article to be met based on infrastructure located only within its territory.
6.   The Competent Authority shall ensure that conditions for supplies to protected customers are established without prejudice to the proper functioning of the internal market in gas and at a price respecting the market value of the supplies.
