Article 13
Information exchange
1.   Where Member States have existing public service obligations that relate to security of gas supply, they shall make these public by 3 January 2011. Any subsequent updates or additional public service obligations that relate to security of gas supply shall also be made public as soon as adopted by Member States.
2.   During an emergency, the natural gas undertakings concerned shall make available in particular the following information to the Competent Authority on a daily basis:
(a)
daily gas demand and supply forecasts for the following 3 days;
(b)
daily flow of gas at all cross-border entry and exit points as well as all points connecting a production facility, a storage facility or an LNG terminal to the network, in mcm/d;
(c)
the period, expressed in days, for which it is expected that gas supply to the protected customers can be ensured.
3.   In the event of a Union or regional emergency, the Commission is entitled to request that the Competent Authority provide it without delay with at least:
(a)
the information set out in paragraph 2;
(b)
information on the measures planned to be undertaken and already implemented by the Competent Authority to mitigate the emergency, and information on their effectiveness;
(c)
the requests made for additional measures to be taken by other Competent Authorities;
(d)
the measures implemented at the request of other Competent Authorities.
4.   The Competent Authorities and the Commission shall preserve the confidentiality of commercially sensitive information.
5.   After an emergency, the Competent Authority shall, as soon as possible and at the latest 6 weeks after the lifting of the emergency, provide to the Commission a detailed assessment of the emergency and the effectiveness of the implemented measures, including an assessment of the economic impact of the emergency, the impact on the electricity sector and the assistance provided to, and/or received from, the Union and its Member States. Such assessment shall be made available to the Gas Coordination Group and shall be reflected in the updates of the Preventive Action Plans and the Emergency Plans.
The Commission shall analyse the assessments of the Competent Authorities and shall inform the Member States, the European Parliament and the Gas Coordination Group of the results of its analysis in aggregate form.
6.   In order to allow the Commission to assess the situation of the security of supply at Union level:
(a)
by 3 December 2011 at the latest, Member States shall communicate to the Commission the existing inter-governmental agreements concluded with third countries which have an impact on the development of gas infrastructures and gas supplies. When concluding new inter-governmental agreements with third countries which have such an impact, the Member States shall inform the Commission;
(b)
for existing contracts by 3 December 2011 at the latest, as well as for new contracts or in the event of changes to existing contracts, natural gas undertakings shall notify the Competent Authorities concerned of the following details of contracts with a duration of more than 1 year concluded with suppliers from third countries:
(i)
contract duration;
(ii)
contracted volumes in total, on an annual basis and the average volume per month;
(iii)
in the event of an alert or emergency, contracted maximal daily volumes;
(iv)
contracted delivery points.
The Competent Authority shall notify these data in aggregate form to the Commission. In the event of new contracts being concluded or changes being made to existing contracts, the whole set of data shall be notified again in aggregate form on a regular basis. The Competent Authority and the Commission shall ensure the confidentiality of the information.
