Article 8
Certification methodologies
1.   An operator or a group of operators shall use the applicable certification methodology to comply with the quality criteria laid down in Articles 4 to 7 (‘certification methodology’).
2.   The Commission shall adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 16 to supplement this Regulation by establishing certification methodologies, which shall specify, for each activity, the elements set out in Annex I.
The Commission shall prioritise the development of certification methodologies for those activities that are the most mature, that have the potential to provide the largest co-benefits or for which Union law relevant for the development of those methodologies has already been adopted.
In the case of carbon farming activities, as part of its prioritisation the Commission shall take into account whether the activities contribute to the sustainable management of agricultural land, forests and the marine environment.
In the case of carbon storage in products, the Commission shall prioritise certification methodologies for wood-based and bio-based construction products.
3.   Delegated acts adopted pursuant to paragraph 2 shall make a distinction between activities related to permanent carbon removal, carbon farming and carbon storage in products and further differentiate the activities on the basis of their characteristics.
The certification methodologies shall:
(a)
ensure the robustness and transparency of carbon removals and soil emission reductions;
(b)
promote the protection and restoration of biodiversity and ecosystems;
(c)
contribute to ensuring the Union’s food security and avoiding land speculation;
(d)
take into account the competitiveness of farmers and forest owners and managers in the Union in a sustainable manner, in particular for small-scale operators;
(e)
promote the sustainability of biomass in accordance with the sustainability and greenhouse gas emissions saving criteria for biofuels, bioliquids and biomass fuels laid down in Article 29 of Directive (EU) 2018/2001;
(f)
ensure the consistency of the application of the principle of the cascading use of biomass as per national authorities in accordance with Article 3(3) of Directive (EU) 2018/2001;
(g)
ensure the avoidance of unsustainable demand for biomass raw material;
(h)
minimise the administrative and financial burden on operators, in particular on small-scale operators, and keep the certification process as simple as possible, and easy to use;
(i)
ensure that cases of reversal are addressed through appropriate liability mechanisms such as collective buffers or up-front insurance mechanisms and, as a last resort, direct cancellation of units.
4.   When preparing the delegated acts referred to in paragraph 2, the Commission shall take into account:
(a)
relevant Union and national law;
(b)
relevant Union, national and international certification methodologies and standards; and
(c)
best available scientific evidence.
