Article 7
Obligations of manufacturers
1.   When placing their products on the market, manufacturers shall ensure that they have been designed and manufactured in accordance with the requirements set out in Article 4(1) and Annex I.
2.   Manufacturers shall draw up the technical documentation in accordance with Article 25 and carry out the conformity assessment procedure applicable or have it carried out in accordance with Articles 19 to 22 and Article 24.
Where compliance of a product with the applicable requirements has been demonstrated by that procedure, manufacturers shall draw up a declaration, as referred to in Article 15 and mark and affix the CE marking, as set out in Articles 17 and 18.
3.   Manufacturers shall keep the technical documentation and a copy of the declaration, as referred to in Article 15, for 10 years after the product has been placed on the market.
4.   Manufacturers shall ensure that procedures are in place for series production to remain in conformity. Changes in product design or characteristics and changes in the harmonised standards by reference to which conformity of a product is declared shall be adequately taken into account.
When deemed appropriate with regard to the risks presented by a product, manufacturers shall, to protect the health and safety of consumers, carry out sample testing of products made available on the market, investigate, and, if necessary, keep a register of complaints, of non-conforming products and product recalls, and shall keep distributors informed of any such monitoring.
5.   Manufacturers shall ensure that their products bear a type, batch or serial number or other element allowing their identification, or, where the size or nature of the components does not allow it, that the required information is provided on the packaging or in a document accompanying the product.
6.   Manufacturers shall indicate their name, registered trade name or registered trade mark and the address at which they can be contacted on the product or, where that is not possible, on its packaging or in a document accompanying the product. The address shall indicate a single point at which the manufacturer can be contacted.
7.   Manufacturers shall ensure that the product is accompanied by instructions and safety information in the owner’s manual in a language or languages which can be easily understood by consumers and other end users, as determined by the Member State concerned.
8.   Manufacturers who consider or have reason to believe that a product which they have placed on the market is not in conformity with this Directive shall immediately take the necessary corrective measures to bring that product into conformity, to withdraw it or recall it, if appropriate. Furthermore, where the product presents a risk, manufacturers shall immediately inform the competent national authorities of the Member States in which they made the product available to that effect, giving details, in particular, of the non-compliance and of any corrective measures taken.
9.   Manufacturers shall, further to a reasoned request from a competent national authority, provide it with all the information and documentation necessary to demonstrate the conformity of the product, in a language which can be easily understood by that authority. They shall cooperate with that authority, at its request, on any action taken to eliminate the risks posed by products which they have placed on the market.
