Article 6
Free movement
1.   Member States shall not impede the making available on the market or, without prejudice to Article 5, the putting into service in their territory of watercraft complying with this Directive.
2.   Member States shall not impede the making available on the market of partly-completed watercraft where the manufacturer or the importer declares, in accordance with Annex III, that they are intended to be completed by others.
3.   Member States shall not impede the making available on the market or putting into service of components complying with this Directive which are intended to be incorporated into watercraft, in accordance with the declaration of the manufacturer or the importer, as referred to in Article 15.
4.   Member States shall not impede the making available on the market or putting into service of any of the following propulsion engines:
(a)
engines, whether or not installed in watercraft, complying with this Directive;
(b)
engines installed in watercraft and type-approved in accordance with Directive 97/68/EC which are in compliance with stage III A, stage III B or stage IV emission limits for CI engines used in other applications than propulsion of inland waterway vessels, locomotives and railcars, as provided for in point 4.1.2. of Annex I to that Directive, complying with this Directive, with the exclusion of the exhaust emission requirements set out in Part B of Annex I;
(c)
engines installed in watercraft and type-approved in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 595/2009, complying with this Directive, with the exclusion of the exhaust emission requirements set out in Part B of Annex I.
Points (b) and (c) of the first subparagraph shall apply subject to the condition that where an engine is adapted for installation in a watercraft, the person undertaking the adaptation shall ensure that full account is taken of the data and other information available from the engine manufacturer in order to ensure that, when installed in accordance with the installation instructions provided by the person adapting the engine, that engine will continue to meet the exhaust emission requirements of either Directive 97/68/EC or of Regulation (EC) No 595/2009, as declared by the engine manufacturer. The person adapting the engine shall declare, as referred to in Article 15, that the engine will continue to meet the exhaust emission requirements of either Directive 97/68/EC or of Regulation (EC) No 595/2009, as declared by the engine manufacturer, when installed in accordance with the installation instructions supplied by the person adapting the engine.
5.   At trade fairs, exhibitions, demonstrations and other similar events Member States shall not impede the showing of products referred to in Article 2(1) which do not comply with this Directive, provided that a visible sign clearly indicates that such products do not comply with this Directive and will not be made available or put into service in the Union until they have been made to comply.
