Article 10
Obligations of distributors
1.   When making a product available on the market distributors shall act with due care in relation to the requirements of this Directive.
2.   Before making a product available on the market distributors shall verify that the product bears the CE marking, as referred to in Article 17, that it is accompanied by the documents required in Article 7(7), Article 15 and point 2.5 of Part A of Annex I, point 4 of Part B of Annex I and point 2 of Part C of Annex I and by instructions and safety information in a language or languages which can be easily understood by consumers and other end-users in the Member State in which the product is to be made available on the market, and that the manufacturer and the importer have complied with the requirements set out in Article 7(5) and (6) and Article 9(3).
Where a distributor considers or has reason to believe that a product is not in conformity with the requirements set out in Article 4(1) and Annex I, he shall not make the product available on the market until it has been brought into conformity. Furthermore, where the product presents a risk, the distributor shall inform the manufacturer or the importer, as well as the market surveillance authorities, to that effect.
3.   Distributors shall ensure that, while a product is under their responsibility, storage or transport conditions do not jeopardise its compliance with the requirements set out in Article 4(1) and Annex I.
4.   Distributors who consider or have reason to believe that a product which they have made available on the market is not in conformity with this Directive shall make sure that the corrective measures necessary to bring that product into conformity, to withdraw it or recall it, if appropriate, are taken. Furthermore, where the product presents a risk, distributors shall immediately inform the competent national authorities of the Member States in which they made the product available on the market to that effect, giving details, in particular, of the non-compliance and of any corrective measures taken.
5.   Distributors shall, further to a reasoned request from a competent national authority, provide that authority with all the information and documentation necessary to demonstrate the conformity of the product. They shall cooperate with that authority, at its request, on any action taken to eliminate the risks posed by products which they have made available on the market.
