Article 11
Resources from and to shared management programmes and use of resources
1.   Resources allocated to Member States under shared management may, at their request, be transferred to the Fund subject to the conditions set out in the relevant provisions of Regulation (EU) 2021/1060. The Commission shall implement those resources directly in accordance with Article 62(1), first subparagraph, point (a), of Regulation (EU, Euratom) 2018/1046. Those resources shall be used exclusively for the benefit of the Member State concerned.
2.   Member States may request in their Plans submitted in accordance with Article 4(1) of this Regulation for the transfer of up to 15 % of their maximum annual financial allocation to the funds under shared management provided for in Regulation (EU) 2021/1060. The transferred resources shall finance measures and investments as referred to in Article 8 of this Regulation and shall be implemented in accordance with the rules of the funds to which the resources are transferred. Resources shall be transferred by Member States through the amendment of one or more programmes, except for programmes under the European territorial cooperation goal (Interreg), in accordance with Article 26a of Regulation (EU) 2021/1060, and shall be implemented in accordance with the rules set out in that Regulation and the rules of the funds to which the resources are transferred.
3.   Member States may entrust the managing authorities of the cohesion policy programmes under Regulation (EU) 2021/1060 with the implementation of measures and investments benefitting from the Fund, where applicable, in view of the synergies with those cohesion policy programmes and in conformity with the objectives of the Fund. Member States shall state their intention to thus entrust those authorities in their Plans. In such cases, the existing management and control systems put in place by Member States, as notified to the Commission, shall be deemed to comply with the requirements of this Regulation.
4.   Member States may include in their Plans, as part of the estimated total costs, the payments for additional technical support pursuant to Article 7 of Regulation (EU) 2021/240 and the amount of the cash contribution for the purpose of the Member State compartment pursuant to the relevant provisions of Regulation (EU) 2021/523 of the European Parliament and of the Council (31). Those costs shall not exceed 4 % of the maximum financial allocation for the Plan, and the relevant measures, as set out in the Plan, shall comply with this Regulation.
