Whereas:
(1)
The Paris Agreement (4), adopted on 12 December 2015 under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) (the ‘Paris Agreement’), entered into force on 4 November 2016. The Parties to the Paris Agreement have agreed to hold the increase in the global average temperature well below 2 °C above pre-industrial levels and to pursue efforts to limit the temperature increase to 1,5 °C above pre-industrial levels. That commitment has been reinforced with the adoption under the UNFCCC of the Glasgow Climate Pact on 13 November 2021, in which the Conference of the Parties to the UNFCC, serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement, recognises that the impacts of climate change will be much lower at a temperature increase of 1,5 °C, compared with 2 °C, and resolves to pursue efforts to limit the temperature increase to 1,5 °C.
(2)
The communication of the Commission of 11 December 2019 on ‘The European Green Deal’ (the ‘European Green Deal’) sets out a new growth strategy that aims to transform the Union into a sustainable, fair and prosperous society, with a modern, resource-efficient and competitive economy, where there are no net emissions of greenhouse gases at the latest by 2050 and where economic growth is decoupled from resource use. The European Green Deal also aims to restore, protect, conserve and enhance the Union’s natural capital, and protect the health and well-being of citizens from environment-related risks and impacts. Finally, it considers that this transition should be just and inclusive, leaving no one behind.
(3)
Through the adoption of Regulation (EU) 2021/1119 of the European Parliament and of the Council (5), the Union has enshrined in legislation the objective of economy-wide climate neutrality by 2050 at the latest, and the aim of achieving negative emissions thereafter. That Regulation also establishes a binding Union domestic reduction target for net greenhouse gas emissions (emissions after deduction of removals) of at least 55 % compared to 1990 levels by 2030. All sectors of the economy are expected to contribute to achieving that target.
(4)
The conclusions of the European Council of 10-11 December 2020 endorsed the binding Union domestic reduction target for net greenhouse gas emissions, while underlining the importance of considerations of fairness and solidarity and leaving no one behind. Those conclusions were reaffirmed in the conclusions of the European Council of 24-25 May 2021, when the European Council invited the Commission to swiftly put forward its legislative package together with an in-depth examination of the environmental, economic and social impact at Member State level.
(5)
The European Pillar of Social Rights Action Plan, endorsed by the conclusions of the European Council of 24-25 June 2021, highlights the need to strengthen social rights and the European social dimension across all policies of the Union. Principle 20 of the European Pillar of Social Rights states that ‘everyone has the right to access essential services of good quality, including water, sanitation, energy, transport, financial services and digital communications. Support for access to such services shall be available for those in need.’.
(6)
The Porto Declaration of 8 May 2021 reaffirmed the European Council’s pledge to work towards a social Europe strengthening a fair transition and its determination to continue deepening the implementation of the European Pillar of Social Rights at Union and national level, with due regard for respective competences and the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality.
(7)
In order to implement the commitment towards climate neutrality, the Union’s climate and energy legislation has been reviewed and amended in order to accelerate greenhouse gas emission reductions.
(8)
Those amendments have differing economic and social impacts on the different sectors of the economy, citizens and Member States. In particular, the inclusion of greenhouse gas emissions from buildings, road transport and additional sectors which correspond to industrial activities not covered by Annex I to Directive 2003/87/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (6) within the scope of that Directive should provide an additional economic incentive to invest in the reduction of fossil fuel consumption and thereby accelerate the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions. Combined with other measures, this should, in the medium to long term, contribute to the reduction of energy poverty and transport poverty, reduce the costs of buildings and road transport, and, where relevant, provide new opportunities for quality job creation and sustainable investments, fully aligned with the goals of the European Green Deal.
(9)
However, resources are needed to finance those investments. In addition, before such investments are made, the cost supported by households and transport users for heating, cooling, cooking, and road transport, is likely to increase as fuel suppliers that are subject to the obligations under the emission trading system for buildings and road transport pass on the costs of carbon to consumers.
(10)
The climate transition will have an economic and social impact that is difficult to assess ex ante. Achieving the increased climate ambition will require substantial public and private resources. Investments in energy efficiency measures, as well as renewable energy-based heating systems, such as heating with electric heat pumps, heating and cooling at district level and participation in renewable energy communities, are an effective method of reducing import dependency and emissions while increasing the Union’s resilience. Dedicated funding to support vulnerable households, vulnerable micro-enterprises and vulnerable transport users is necessary.
(11)
The increase in the price for fossil fuels can disproportionally affect vulnerable households, vulnerable micro-enterprises and vulnerable transport users who spend a larger part of their income on energy and transport, who, in certain regions, do not have access to alternative, affordable mobility and transport solutions, and who may lack the financial capacity to invest in the reduction of fossil fuel consumption. Geographic specificities, such as islands, outermost regions and territories, rural or remote areas, less accessible peripheries, mountainous areas or areas that are lagging behind, can have specific impacts in the context of transport poverty on the vulnerability of households, micro-enterprises and transport users. Therefore, those geographic specificities should be taken into account when preparing measures and investments in support of vulnerable households, vulnerable micro-enterprises and vulnerable transport users, where applicable and relevant.
(12)
A part of the revenues generated by the inclusion of buildings, road transport and additional sectors within the scope of Directive 2003/87/EC should be used to address the social impacts arising from that inclusion, in order for the transition to be just and inclusive, leaving no one behind. The overall amount of the Social Climate Fund established under this Regulation (the ‘Fund’) should reflect the level of decarbonisation ambition from the inclusion of greenhouse gas emissions from buildings, road transport and additional sectors within the scope of Directive 2003/87/EC.
(13)
Using part of the revenues to address the social impacts arising from the inclusion of the buildings, road transport and additional sectors within the scope of Directive 2003/87/EC is even more relevant in view of the existing levels of energy poverty. Energy poverty is a situation in which households are unable to access essential energy services that underpin a decent standard of living and health, such as adequate warmth through heating, cooling, as temperatures rise, lighting, and energy to power appliances. In a 2021 Union-wide survey, approximately 34 million Europeans, nearly 6,9 % of the population of the Union, said that they could not afford to heat their home sufficiently. Energy poverty is therefore a major challenge for the Union. While social tariffs or temporary direct income support can provide immediate relief to households facing energy poverty in the short term, only targeted structural measures, in particular building renovations, including through access to energy from renewable sources and the active promotion of renewable energy sources through information and awareness-raising measures targeted at households, and building renovations that contribute to the objectives established in Directive 2010/31/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council (7) can provide lasting solutions and effectively help combat energy poverty. It should be possible for the definition of energy poverty under this Regulation to be updated to reflect the outcome of the negotiations on a Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on energy efficiency (recast).
(14)
A holistic approach to building renovations that takes into account in a more efficient way people at risk of exclusion, namely those who suffer most from energy poverty in the Union, could lead to less demand for energy. Therefore, the support under the Fund to the buildings sector should aim to improve energy efficiency, leading to a reduction in energy consumption for each household that would be visible in terms of the money saved and, as a result, would provide one means of combating energy poverty. The revision of Directive 2010/31/EU would lay the foundations for those objectives to be achieved and should therefore be taken into account when implementing this Regulation.
(15)
Since transport poverty has not yet been defined at Union level, such a definition should be introduced for the purpose of this Regulation. Transport poverty could become an even more pressing issue, as recognised in the Council Recommendation of 16 June 2022 on ensuring a fair transition towards climate neutrality (8), and result in diminished access to essential socioeconomic activities and services such as employment, education or healthcare, in particular for vulnerable individuals and households. Transport poverty is usually caused by one or a combination of factors such as low income, high fuel expenditures, or a lack of affordable or accessible private or public transport. Transport poverty can particularly affect individuals and households in rural, insular, peripheral, mountainous, remote and less accessible areas or less developed regions or territories, including less developed peri-urban areas and the outermost regions.
(16)
The Fund should be established to provide funds to the Member States to support their policies to address the social impacts of the introduction of the emissions trading system for buildings and road transport on vulnerable households, vulnerable micro-enterprises and vulnerable transport users. This should be achieved in particular through temporary direct income support and measures and investments intended to reduce reliance on fossil fuels through increased energy efficiency of buildings, decarbonisation of heating and cooling of buildings, irrespective of who owns those buildings, including the integration of energy from renewable sources, and through granting improved access to zero- and low-emission mobility and transport to the benefit of vulnerable households, vulnerable micro-enterprises and vulnerable transport users. Attention needs to be paid to the different forms of rental housing, including those on the private rental market. Financial support or fiscal incentives, such as deductibility of renovation costs from the rent could be included among the measures in order to take account of tenants and people living in social housing.
(17)
Each Member State should submit to the Commission a Social Climate Plan (the ‘Plan’). The Plans should be submitted by 30 June 2025 so that they can be given careful and timely consideration. The Plans should have an investment component that promotes the long-term solution of reducing fossil fuels reliance and could envisage other measures, including temporary direct income support, to mitigate adverse effects on income in the shorter term. The Plans should pursue two objectives. First, they should provide vulnerable households, vulnerable micro-enterprises and vulnerable transport users with the necessary resources to finance and carry out investments in energy efficiency, decarbonisation of heating and cooling, in zero- and low-emission vehicles and mobility, including through vouchers, subsidies or zero-interest loans. Second, they should mitigate the impact of the increase in the cost of fossil fuels on the most vulnerable and thereby prevent energy poverty and transport poverty during the transitional period until such investments have been carried out. The Plans could support access to affordable energy-efficient housing, including social housing. When implementing measures in support of vulnerable transport users, it should be possible for Member States to prioritise support to zero-emission vehicles in their Plans, provided that it is an affordable and deployable solution.
(18)
Member States, in consultation with local and regional authorities, economic and social partners and relevant civil society organisations, are best placed to design, implement and, where relevant, amend Plans that are adapted and targeted to their local, regional and national circumstances, their existing policies in the relevant areas and planned use of other relevant Union funds. A public consultation of stakeholders should take place every time the Commission is required to assess a Plan. In that manner, the broad diversity of situations, the specific knowledge of local and regional governments, economic and social partners, relevant civil society organisations, research and innovation institutions, industrial stakeholders and social dialogue representatives, as well as national circumstances can best be reflected and contribute to the effectiveness and efficiency of the overall support to the vulnerable.
(19)
The Plans should be designed in close cooperation with the Commission and prepared in accordance with the template provided. In order to avoid excessive administrative burdens, it should be possible for Member States to make minor adjustments to or correct clerical errors in the Plans, by a simple notification of those changes to the Commission. Minor adjustments should represent an increase or decrease of less than 5 % of a target envisaged in the Plan.
(20)
Ensuring that the measures and investments are particularly targeted towards households in energy poverty or vulnerable households, vulnerable micro-enterprises and vulnerable transport users is key for a just transition towards climate neutrality. Support measures to promote reductions in greenhouse gas emissions should help Member States to address the social impacts arising from the emissions trading in the buildings and road transport sectors.
(21)
Pending the impact of those investments on reducing costs and emissions, well targeted direct income support for vulnerable households and vulnerable transport users would contribute to a reduction of energy and mobility costs and would support the just transition. Direct income support should be understood to be a temporary measure accompanying the decarbonisation of the housing and transport sectors. It would not be permanent as it does not address the root causes of energy poverty and transport poverty. Such support should only be used to address direct impacts of the inclusion of greenhouse gas emissions from buildings and road transport within the scope of Directive 2003/87/EC, and should not be used to address electricity or heating costs related to the inclusion of power and heat production in the scope of that Directive. Eligibility for such direct income support should be limited in time. Recipients of direct income support should be targeted, as members of a general group of recipients, by measures and investments aimed at effectively lifting those recipients out of energy poverty and transport poverty. The Plans should therefore include direct income support provided that they also contain measures or investments with lasting impacts targeted at the vulnerable households and vulnerable transport users who receive direct income support.
(22)
Member States should raise awareness among vulnerable households, vulnerable micro-enterprises and vulnerable transport users by providing targeted, accessible and affordable information, education and advice on cost-effective measures and investments, and available support, including through energy audits of buildings, as well as tailored energy consultations or tailored mobility management services.
(23)
Taking into account the importance of tackling climate change in accordance with the Paris Agreement commitments, and the commitment to the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals, the measures and investments under this Regulation are intended to be in line with the target that at least 30 % of the total amount of the Union budget under the multiannual financial framework for the years 2021 to 2027 laid down in Council Regulation (EU, Euratom) 2020/2093 (9) (the ‘MFF 2021-2027’) and of the total amount of the European Union Recovery Instrument, established by Council Regulation (EU) 2020/2094 (10), and at least 37 % of the total amount of the Recovery and Resilience Facility, established by Regulation (EU) 2021/241 of the European Parliament and of the Council (11), should be spent on mainstreaming climate objectives. The measures and investments under this Regulation are also intended to be in line with the ambition of providing 7,5 % of annual spending under the MFF 2021-2027 to biodiversity objectives in 2024 and 10 % of annual spending under MFF 2021-2027 to biodiversity objectives in 2026 and 2027, while considering the existing overlaps between climate and biodiversity goals.
For that purpose, the methodology set out in Annex I to Regulation (EU) 2021/1060 of the European Parliament and of the Council (12) should be used to track the expenditures of the Fund. The Fund should support measures and investments that fully respect climate and environmental standards and priorities of the Union and comply with the principle of ‘do no significant harm’ within the meaning of Article 17 of Regulation (EU) 2020/852 of the European Parliament and of the Council (13). Only such measures and investments should be included in the Plans. Direct income support measures should, as a rule, be considered as having an insignificant foreseeable impact on environmental objectives and, as such, should be considered to be compliant with the principle of ‘do no significant harm’. The Commission should issue technical guidance to the Member States well ahead of the preparation of the Plans. The guidance should explain how the measures and investments are to comply with the principle of ‘do no significant harm’.
(24)
Women are disproportionately affected by energy poverty and transport poverty, in particular single mothers, who represent 85 % of single parent families, as well as single women, women with disabilities, and elderly women living alone. In addition, women have different and more complex mobility patterns. Single parent families with dependent children have a particularly high risk of child poverty. Gender equality and equal opportunities for all, and the mainstreaming of those objectives, as well as accessibility rights of persons with disabilities should be upheld and promoted throughout the preparation and implementation of Plans to ensure that no one is left behind.
(25)
Active customers, citizen energy communities and peer-to-peer trading of renewable energy can help Member States achieve the objectives of this Regulation through a bottom-up approach initiated by citizens. They empower and engage consumers and enable certain groups of household customers to participate in energy efficiency measures and investments, support the use of renewable energy of households and at the same time contribute to fighting energy poverty. Member States should therefore promote the role of citizen energy communities and renewable energy communities and regard them as eligible beneficiaries of the Fund.
(26)
Member States should include in the Plans the measures and investments to be financed, the estimated costs of those measures and investments, and the national contribution. When submitting their Plans, Member States should present the estimated total costs excluding the value added tax (VAT) to enable comparability between the Plans. The Plans should also include key milestones and targets so that the effective implementation of the measures and investments can be assessed.
(27)
The Fund and the Plans should be coherent with and framed by the reforms planned and the commitments made by the Member States under their updated integrated national energy and climate plans in accordance with Regulation (EU) 2018/1999 of the European Parliament and of the Council (14), under Directive of the European Parliament and the Council on energy efficiency (recast), under the European Pillar of Social Rights Action Plan, under cohesion policy programmes in accordance with Regulation (EU) 2021/1060, under territorial just transition plans in accordance with Regulation (EU) 2021/1056 of the European Parliament and of the Council (15), under recovery and resilience plans in accordance with Regulation (EU) 2021/241, under the Modernisation Fund, as set out in Article 10d of Directive 2003/87/EC, and under the Member States’ long-term building renovation strategies in accordance with Directive 2010/31/EU. To ensure administrative efficiency, where applicable, the information included in the Plans should be consistent with those legislative acts and plans.
(28)
For more efficient planning, Member States should indicate in their Plans the consequences of postponing the emission trading system established in accordance with Chapter IVa of Directive 2003/87/EC, pursuant to Article 30k of that Directive. To that end, all the relevant information to be included in the Plan should be thoroughly distinguished by separating it into two scenarios, namely, by describing and quantifying the necessary adjustments to the measures, investments, milestones, targets, the amount of national contribution and any other relevant element of the Plan.
(29)
The Union should support Member States with financial means to implement their Plans through the Fund. Payments from the Fund should be made conditional upon the achievement of the milestones and targets included in the Plans. This would enable national circumstances and priorities to be taken into account, while simplifying financing and facilitating the integration of financing under the Fund with other national spending programmes and while guaranteeing the impact and the integrity of Union spending.
(30)
The Fund should be exceptionally and temporarily financed by the revenue generated from the auctioning of 50 million allowances pursuant to Article 10a(8b) of Directive 2003/87/EC, 150 million allowances pursuant to Article 30d(3) of that Directive and a volume of additional allowances pursuant to Article 30d(4) of that Directive, which should constitute external assigned revenue. In principle, a maximum amount of EUR 65 000 000 000 should be made available for the implementation of the Fund for the period 2026-2032. The Commission is to ensure the auctioning of allowances covered by Chapter IVa of that Directive. Where the emission trading system established in accordance with that Chapter is postponed until 2028 pursuant to Article 30k of that Directive, the maximum amount available for the implementation of the Fund should be EUR 54 600 000 000. That amount and the annual amounts reflect a greater need of financing at the start of the Fund. The maximum financial allocation should be calculated for each Member State in accordance with an allocation methodology providing, in particular, additional support to those Member States that are more impacted by the inclusion of greenhouse gas emissions from buildings and road transport within the scope of Directive 2003/87/EC. Considering that the external assigned revenue is to be made available following the auctioning of allowances pursuant to Articles 10a(8b), 30d(3) and 30d(4) of Directive 2003/87/EC, it is necessary to provide for a derogation from Article 22(2) of Regulation (EU, Euratom) 2018/1046 of the European Parliament and of the Council (16) to enable the Union to commit each year the amounts necessary for the payments to Member States to be made in accordance with this Regulation for the accommodation of appropriations corresponding to assigned revenue.
(31)
Member States should contribute at least 25 % of the estimated total costs of their Plans.
(32)
The budgetary commitments should be able to be broken down into annual instalments, where appropriate. The agreements with Member States constituting individual legal commitments should take into account, inter alia, the event referred to in Article 30k of Directive 2003/87/EC which could trigger a one year delay of the start of emissions trading for buildings, road transport and additional sectors. Those agreements should also take into account any potential financial risks for the Union, which might require an amendment of the individual legal commitments, due to the specificities of the temporary and exceptional financing of the Fund by external assigned revenue generated from allowances of the emission trading system.
(33)
In order to ensure additional resources for the Fund, the Member States should be able to request a transfer of resources to the Fund from the cohesion policy programmes under shared management, established by Regulation (EU) 2021/1060, subject to the conditions set out in that Regulation. In order to provide Member States with sufficient flexibility in the implementation of their allocations under the Fund, it should be possible to transfer resources from their annual financial allocation to funds under shared management provided for in Regulation (EU) 2021/1060, up to a ceiling of 15 %. With a view to alleviating the administrative burden resulting from successive transfers of resources from their annual financial allocation from the Fund to funds under shared management falling within the scope of Regulation (EU) 2021/1060, the corresponding amendment of one or more programmes should, in principle, be required only once, subject to certain conditions to ensure effective financial control. It should be possible to effect further transfers in subsequent years by notifying the financial tables to the Commission, provided that the changes relate exclusively to an increase in the financial resources, without any further changes to the programme concerned.
(34)
The Fund should support measures that respect the principle of additionality of Union funding. The Fund should not be a substitute for recurring national expenditure, except in duly justified cases, including for payments of costs for technical assistance actions indicated in the Plans.
(35)
In order to ensure the efficient, transparent and coherent allocation of funds, and to respect the principle of sound financial management, actions under this Regulation should be consistent with and be complementary to ongoing Union, national and, where appropriate, regional programmes, whilst avoiding double funding from the Fund and other Union programmes for the same expenditure. In particular, the Commission and Member States should ensure effective coordination, at all stages of the process, in order to safeguard the consistency, coherence, complementarity and synergy among sources of funding. To that effect, Member States should be required to present the relevant information on existing or planned Union financing when submitting their Plans to the Commission. Financial support under the Fund should be additional to the support provided under other Union programmes and instruments. Measures and investments financed under the Fund should be able to receive funding from other Union programmes and instruments provided that such support does not cover the same costs.
(36)
Payments should be made on the basis of a Commission decision authorising the disbursement to the Member State concerned. It is therefore necessary to derogate from Article 116(2) of Regulation (EU, Euratom) 2018/1046, so that the payment deadline can start running from the date of the communication from the Commission to the Member State concerned of that decision and not from the date on which a payment request is received.
(37)
After the analysis of all the payment requests received in a given round, and if revenues assigned to the Fund in accordance with Article 30d(4) of Directive 2003/87/EC are not sufficient to cover the payment requests submitted by the Member States, the Commission should pay the Member States on a pro rata basis in order to provide for an equal treatment of Member States. In the following round of payment requests, the Commission should give priority to those Member States with delayed payments from the previous round of payment requests, and only afterwards pay the newly submitted payment requests.
(38)
In order to facilitate the preparation of the Plans and to ensure transparent rules for monitoring and evaluation, the list of common indicators and the template for the Plans should be included in the Annexes to this Regulation. It should be possible for the Member States to use relevant common indicators to set out the milestones and targets in their Plans. The list of common indicators should contain the common indicators for reporting on the progress and for the purpose of monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of the Plans and of the Fund.
(39)
The Fund should be implemented in line with the principle of sound financial management, including the effective prevention and prosecution of fraud, tax fraud, tax evasion, corruption and conflicts of interests. The Fund is subject to a general regime of conditionality for the protection of the Union budget in the case of breaches of the principles of the rule of law in the Member States established by Regulation (EU, Euratom) 2020/2092 of the European Parliament and of the Council (17).
(40)
For the purpose of sound financial management, while respecting the performance-based nature of the Fund, specific rules should be laid down for budget commitments, payments, suspension, and the recovery of funds as well as for the termination of agreements related to financial support. The Member States should take appropriate measures to ensure that the use of funds in relation to measures supported by the Fund complies with applicable Union and national law. Member States should ensure that such support is granted in compliance with the Union State aid rules, where applicable. In particular, they should ensure that fraud, corruption and conflicts of interests are prevented, detected and corrected, and that double funding from the Fund and other Union programmes is avoided. Suspension and the termination of agreements related to financial support, as well as reduction and recovery of the financial allocation, should be possible when the Plan has not been implemented in a satisfactory manner by the Member State concerned or in the case of serious irregularities, namely fraud, corruption and conflicts of interests in relation to the measures supported by the Fund or a serious breach of an obligation under the agreements related to financial support. In the case of the termination of an agreement related to financial support or the reduction and recovery of a financial allocation, those amounts should be allocated to Member States by 31 December 2033 according to the rules for distribution of allowances set out in Article 30d(5) of Directive 2003/87/EC. Appropriate contradictory procedures should be established to ensure that the decisions of the Commission in relation to suspension and recovery of amounts paid or the termination of agreements related to financial support respect the right of Member States to submit observations.
(41)
The Commission should ensure that the financial interests of the Union are protected effectively. While it is primarily the responsibility of the Member State itself to ensure that the Fund is implemented in compliance with relevant Union and national law, the Commission should be able to receive sufficient assurance from Member States in that regard. To that end, in implementing the Fund, Member States should ensure the functioning of an effective and efficient internal control system and should recover amounts unduly paid or misused. In that regard, Member States should be able to rely on their regular national budget management systems. Member States should collect, record and store in an electronic system, standardised categories of data and information allowing the prevention, detection and correction of serious irregularities in relation to the measures and investments supported by the Fund, namely fraud, corruption and conflicts of interests. The Commission should make available an information and monitoring system, including a single data-mining and risk-scoring tool, to access and analyse that data and information. The Commission should encourage the use of that information and monitoring system with a view to a generalised application by Member States.
(42)
The Commission, the European Anti-Fraud Office (OLAF), the Court of Auditors and, where applicable, the European Public Prosecutor’s Office (EPPO) should be able to use the information and monitoring system within their competences and rights.
(43)
The Member States and the Commission should be allowed to process personal data only where necessary for the purpose of ensuring discharge, audit and control, information, communication and visibility of the use of funds in relation to measures for the implementation under the Fund. Personal data should be processed in accordance with Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council (18) or Regulation (EU) 2018/1725 of the European Parliament and of the Council (19), whichever is applicable.
(44)
In accordance with Regulation (EU, Euratom) 2018/1046, Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 883/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council (20), and Council Regulations (EC, Euratom) No 2988/95 (21), (Euratom, EC) No 2185/96 (22) and (EU) 2017/1939 (23), the financial interests of the Union are to be protected by means of proportionate measures, including measures relating to the prevention, detection, correction and investigation of fraud, corruption and conflicts of interests, and, where appropriate, the imposition of administrative penalties. In particular, in accordance with Regulations (Euratom, EC) No 2185/96 and (EU, Euratom) No 883/2013, OLAF has the power to carry out administrative investigations, including on-the-spot checks and inspections, with a view to establishing whether there has been fraud, corruption, conflicts of interests or any other illegal activity affecting the financial interests of the Union.
EPPO is empowered, in accordance with Regulation (EU) 2017/1939, to investigate and prosecute fraud, corruption, conflicts of interests and other criminal offences affecting the financial interests of the Union as provided for in Directive (EU) 2017/1371 of the European Parliament and of the Council (24). In accordance with Regulation (EU, Euratom) 2018/1046, any person or entity receiving Union funds is to fully cooperate in the protection of the financial interests of the Union, grant the necessary rights and access to the Commission, OLAF, the Court of Auditors and, in respect of those Member States participating in enhanced cooperation, EPPO pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2017/1939, and ensure that any third parties involved in the implementation of Union funds grant equivalent rights.
(45)
Horizontal financial rules adopted by the European Parliament and by the Council pursuant to Article 322 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU) apply to this Regulation. Those rules are laid down in Regulation (EU, Euratom) 2018/1046 and determine in particular the procedure for establishing and implementing the Union budget through grants, procurement, prizes and indirect management, and provide for checks on the responsibility of financial actors. Rules adopted pursuant to Article 322 TFEU also include a general regime of conditionality for the protection of the Union budget.
(46)
Regulation (EU) 2021/1060 should be amended accordingly.
(47)
Since the objective of this Regulation, namely to contribute to a socially fair transition towards climate neutrality by addressing the social impacts of the inclusion of greenhouse gas emissions from buildings and road transport within the scope of Directive 2003/87/EC, cannot be sufficiently achieved by the Member States but can rather, by reason of its scale and effects, be better achieved at Union level, the Union may adopt measures, in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity as set out in Article 5 of the Treaty on European Union. In accordance with the principle of proportionality as set out in that Article, this Regulation does not go beyond what is necessary in order to achieve that objective,
HAVE ADOPTED THIS REGULATION:
