Article 18
Amendment of Social Climate Plans
1.   Where a Plan is no longer achievable, including relevant milestones and targets, or needs to be significantly adjusted, either in whole or in part, by a Member State because of objective circumstances, in particular because of the actual direct effects of the inclusion of greenhouse gas emissions from buildings and road transport within the scope of Directive 2003/87/EC, the Member State concerned shall submit an amended Plan to the Commission in order to include the necessary and duly justified changes. Member States may request technical support, in accordance with Article 11(4), for the preparation of the amended Plan.
2.   The Commission shall assess the amended Plan in accordance with Article 16.
3.   Where the Commission gives a positive assessment of the amended Plan, it shall in accordance with Article 17(1) adopt a decision setting out the reasons for its positive assessment, by means of an implementing act. By way of derogation from Article 17(1), the Commission shall adopt the decision under this paragraph within three months from the date of the submission of the amended Plan by the Member State concerned.
4.   Where the Commission gives a negative assessment of the amended Plan, it shall reject the amended Plan within the period referred to in paragraph 3, after having given the Member State concerned the possibility to present its observations within three months from the date of the communication of the Commission’s assessment of the amended Plan.
5.   By 15 March 2029 each Member State shall assess the appropriateness of its Plan in view of the actual direct effects of the inclusion of greenhouse gas emissions from buildings and road transport within the scope of Directive 2003/87/EC. Those assessments shall be submitted to the Commission together with the integrated national energy and climate progress reports pursuant to Article 17 of Regulation (EU) 2018/1999.
6.   In the case of minor adjustments to the Plan, representing an increase or decrease of less than 5 % of a target set out in the Plan, such as minor updates in the measures and investments set out in the Plan, or the correction of clerical errors, a Member State shall notify such changes to the Commission.
