Article 28
Amendment to Regulation (EU) 2021/1060
The following Article is inserted in Regulation (EU) 2021/1060:
‘Article 26a
Resources transferred from the Social Climate Fund
1.   Resources transferred from the Social Climate Fund, established by Regulation (EU) 2023/955 of the European Parliament and of the Council (*1) shall be implemented in accordance with this Regulation and the provisions governing the Fund to which the resources are transferred and shall be definitive. Such resources shall constitute external assigned revenue for the purpose of Article 21(5) of Regulation (EU, Euratom) 2018/1046 and shall be additional to the resources referred to in Article 110 of this Regulation.
2.   Where Member States implement the resources referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article under shared management, they shall submit programme amendments in accordance with Article 24 of this Regulation concerning one or more programmes. Member States shall plan the use of such resources for achieving the climate objectives set out for the Union budget in accordance with Article 6(1) of this Regulation. Those resources shall contribute to achieving relevant objectives of the Social Climate Fund as set out in Article 3 of Regulation (EU) 2023/955 and shall be used to support measures and investments set out in Article 8 of that Regulation. They shall be programmed under one or more dedicated priorities corresponding to one or more specific objectives of the Fund to which the resources are transferred and for one or more categories of regions, where applicable, with an indication of the yearly breakdown of resources. They shall not be taken into account for the calculation of compliance with thematic concentration requirements as set out in Fund-specific rules.
3.   Where the Commission has already approved a Member State’s request for an amendment of a programme relating to a transfer of resources from the Social Climate Fund, for any further transfer of resources in subsequent years, the Member State may submit a notification of financial tables instead of an amendment of a programme, provided that the proposed changes relate exclusively to an increase of the financial resources, without any further changes to the programme.
4.   By way of derogation from Article 18 and Article 86(1), second subparagraph, of this Regulation, the resources transferred in accordance with this Article and Article 11(2) of Regulation (EU) 2023/955 shall not be taken into account for the mid-term review and the flexibility amount.
5.   By way of derogation from Article 14(3) of Regulation (EU, Euratom) 2018/1046, the time limit after which the Commission shall decommit the amounts in accordance with Article 105(1) of this Regulation shall start from the year in which the corresponding budgetary commitments are made. Resources shall not be transferred to programmes under the European territorial cooperation goal (Interreg).
