Article 28
Agri-environment-climate
1.   Member States shall make support under this measure available throughout their territories, in accordance with their national, regional or local specific needs and priorities. This measure shall aim to preserve and promote the necessary changes to agricultural practices that make a positive contribution to the environment and climate. Its inclusion in rural development programmes shall be compulsory at national and/or regional level.
2.   Agri-environment-climate payments shall be granted to farmers, groups of farmers or groups of farmers and other land-managers who undertake, on a voluntary basis, to carry out operations consisting of one or more agri-environment-climate commitments on agricultural land to be defined by Member States, including but not limited to the agricultural area defined under Article 2 of this Regulation. Where duly justified to achieve environmental objectives, agri-environment-climate payments may be granted to other land-managers or groups of other land-managers.
3.   Agri-environment-climate payments cover only those commitments going beyond the relevant mandatory standards established pursuant to Chapter I of Title VI of Regulation (EU) No 1306/2013, the relevant criteria and minimum activities as established pursuant to points (c)(ii) and (c)(iii) of Article 4(1) of Regulation (EU) No 1307/2013, and relevant minimum requirements for fertiliser and plant protection products use as well as other relevant mandatory requirements established by national law. All such mandatory requirements shall be identified in the programme.
4.   Member States shall endeavour to ensure that persons undertaking to carry out operations under this measure are provided with the knowledge and information required to implement such operations. They may do so through, inter alia, commitment-related expert advice and/or by making support under this measure conditional on obtaining relevant training.
5.   Commitments under this measure shall be undertaken for a period of five to seven years. However, where necessary in order to achieve or maintain the environmental benefits sought, Member States may determine a longer period in their rural development programmes for particular types of commitments, including by means of providing for their annual extension after the termination of the initial period. For new commitments directly following the commitment performed in the initial period, Member States may determine a shorter period in their rural development programmes.
6.   Payments shall be granted annually and shall compensate beneficiaries for all or part of the additional costs and income foregone resulting from the commitments made. Where necessary, they may also cover transaction costs up to a value of 20 % of the premium paid for the agri-environment-climate commitments. Where commitments are undertaken by groups of farmers or groups of farmers and other land managers, the maximum level shall be 30 %.
When calculating the payments referred to in the first sub-paragraph, Member States shall deduct the amount necessary in order to exclude double funding of the practices referred to in Article 43 of Regulation (EU) No 1306/2013.
In duly justified cases for operations concerning environmental conservation, support may be granted at a flat-rate or as a one-off payment per unit for commitments to renounce commercial use of areas, calculated on the basis of additional costs incurred and income foregone.
7.   Where required in order to ensure the efficient application of the measure, Member States may use the procedure referred to in Article 49(3) for the selection of beneficiaries.
8.   Support shall be limited to the maximum amounts laid down in Annex II.
No support under this measure may be granted for commitments that are covered under the organic farming measure.
9.   Support may be provided for the conservation and for the sustainable use and development of genetic resources in agriculture for operations not covered by the provisions under paragraphs 1 to 8. Such commitments may be carried out by beneficiaries other than those referred to in paragraph 2.
10.   In order to ensure that agri-environment-climate commitments are defined in accordance with the Union priorities for rural development, the Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 83 concerning the following:
(a)
the conditions applicable to commitments to extensify livestock farming;
(b)
the conditions applicable to commitments to rear local breeds that are in danger of being lost to farming or to preserve plant genetic resources that are under threat of genetic erosion, and
(c)
the definition of eligible operations under paragraph 9.
11.   In order to ensure that double funding, as referred to in the second subparagraph of paragraph 6 is excluded, the Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 83 laying down the calculation method to be used, including in the case of equivalent measures under Article 43 of Regulation (EU) No 1306/2013.
