Article 47
Rules for area related payments
1.   The number of hectares to which a commitment pursuant to Articles 28, 29 and 34 applies may vary from year to year where:
(a)
this possibility is provided for in the rural development programme;
(b)
the commitment in question does not apply to fixed parcels; and
(c)
the achievement of the commitment's objective is not jeopardised.
2.   Where all or part of the land under commitment or the entire holding is transferred to another person during the period of that commitment, the commitment, or part thereof corresponding to the land transferred, may be taken over for the remainder of the period by that other person or may expire and reimbursement shall not be required in respect of the period during which the commitment was effective.
3.   Where a beneficiary is unable to continue to comply with commitments given because the holding or part of the holding is re-parcelled or is the subject of public land consolidation measures or land consolidation measures approved by the competent public authorities, Member States shall take the measures necessary to allow the commitments to be adapted to the new situation of the holding. If such adaptation proves impossible, the commitment shall expire and reimbursement shall not be required in respect of the period during which the commitment was effective.
4.   Reimbursement of the aid received shall not be required in cases of force majeure and exceptional circumstances as referred to in Article 2 of Regulation (EU) No 1306/2013.
5.   Paragraph 2, as regards cases of transfer of the entire holding, and paragraph 4 shall also apply to commitments under Article 33.
6.   In order to ensure the efficient implementation of area related measures and secure the financial interests of the Union, the Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 83 laying down conditions applicable to conversion or adjustment of commitments under the measures referred to in Articles 28, 29, 33 and 34 and, specifying other situations in which reimbursement of the aid shall not be required.
