Article 45
Investments
1.   In order to be eligible for EAFRD support, investment operations shall be preceded by an assessment of the expected environmental impact in accordance with law specific to that kind of investment where the investment is likely to have negative effects on the environment.
2.   Expenditure that is eligible for EAFRD support shall be limited to:
(a)
the construction, acquisition, including leasing, or improvement of immovable property;
(b)
the purchase or lease purchase of new machinery and equipment up to the market value of the asset;
(c)
general costs linked to expenditure referred to in points (a) and (b), such as architect, engineer and consultation fees, fees relating to advice on environmental and economic sustainability, including feasibility studies. Feasibility studies shall remain eligible expenditure even where, based on their results, no expenditure under points (a) and (b) is made;
(d)
the following intangible investments: acquisition or development of computer software and acquisitions of patents, licenses, copyrights, trademarks;
(e)
the costs of establishing forest management plans and their equivalent.
3.   In the case of agricultural investments, the purchase of agricultural production rights, payment entitlements, animals, annual plants and their planting shall not be eligible for investment support. However, in case of the restoration of agricultural production potential damaged by natural disasters or catastrophic events, in accordance with point (b) of Article 18(1), expenditure for the purchase of animals may be eligible expenditure.
4.   Beneficiaries of investment related support may request the payment of an advance of up to 50 % of the public aid related to the investment from the competent paying agencies if that option is included in the rural development programme.
5.   Working capital that is ancillary to, and linked to a new investment in the agriculture or forestry sector, which receives EAFRD support through a financial instrument established in accordance with Article 37 of Regulation (EU) No 1303/2013, may be eligible expenditure. Such eligible expenditure shall not exceed 30 % of the total amount of the eligible expenditure for the investment. The relevant request shall be duly substantiated.
6.   In order to take account of the special characteristics of particular types of investments, the Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 83, laying down the conditions under which other costs connected with leasing contracts, second hand equipment may be considered to be eligible expenditure and specifying the types of renewable energy infrastructure that are to be eligible for support.
