Article 14
Knowledge transfer and information actions
1.   Support under this measure shall cover vocational training and skills acquisition actions, demonstration activities and information actions. Vocational training and skills acquisition actions may include training courses, workshops and coaching.
Support may also cover short-term farm and forest management exchanges as well as farm and forest visits.
2.   Support under this measure shall be for the benefit of persons engaged in the agricultural, food and forestry sector, land managers and other economic actors which are SMEs operating in rural areas.
The training or other knowledge transfer and information action provider shall be the beneficiary of the support.
3.   Support under this measure shall not include courses of instruction or training, which form part of normal education programmes or systems at secondary or higher levels.
Bodies providing knowledge transfer and information services shall have the appropriate capacities in the form of staff qualifications and regular training to carry out this task.
4.   Eligible costs under this measure shall be the costs of organising and delivering the knowledge transfer or information action. In the case of demonstration projects, support may also cover relevant investment costs. Costs for travel, accommodation and per diem expenses of participants as well as the cost of the replacement of farmers shall also be eligible for support. All costs identified under this paragraph shall be paid to the beneficiary.
5.   In order to ensure that farm and forest exchange schemes and visits are clearly demarcated in relation to similar actions under other Union schemes, the Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 83 concerning the duration and content of farm and forest exchange schemes and farm and forest visits.
6.   The Commission shall adopt implementing acts laying down the rules on payment modalities for participants' costs, including through the use of vouchers or other similar forms.
Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 84.
