Article 52
European network for rural development
1.   A European network for rural development for the networking of national networks, organisations, and administrations active in the field of rural development at Union level shall be put in place in accordance with Article 51(1).
2.   Networking through the European network for rural development shall aim to:
(a)
increase the involvement of all stakeholders, and in particular agricultural, forestry and other rural development stakeholders in the implementation of rural development;
(b)
improve the quality of rural development programmes;
(c)
play a role in informing the broader public on the benefits of rural development policy.
(d)
support the evaluation of rural development programmes.
3.   The tasks of the network shall be to:
(a)
collect, analyse and disseminate information on action in the field of rural development;
(b)
provide support on evaluation processes and on data collection and management;
(c)
collect, consolidate and disseminate at Union level good rural development practices, including on evaluation methodologies and tools;
(d)
set up and run thematic groups and/or workshops with a view to facilitating the exchange of expertise and to supporting the implementation, monitoring and further development of rural development policy;
(e)
provide information on developments in rural areas of the Union and in third countries;
(f)
organise meetings and seminars at Union level for those actively involved in rural development;
(g)
support the national networks and transnational co-operation initiatives and the exchange concerning actions and experience in the field of rural development with networks in third countries;
(h)
specifically for local action groups:
(i)
create synergies with the activities carried out at national or regional level, or at both by the respective networks with regard to capacity building actions and exchange of experience; and
(ii)
cooperate with the networking and technical support bodies for local development set up by the ERDF, the ESF and the EMFF as regards their local development activities and transnational co-operation.
4.   The Commission shall adopt implementing acts, setting out the organisational structure and operation of the European network for rural development network. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 84.
