Article 38
Mutual funds for adverse climatic events, animal and plant diseases, pest infestations and environmental incidents
1.   In order to be eligible for support the mutual fund concerned shall:
(a)
be accredited by the competent authority in accordance with national law;
(b)
have a transparent policy towards payments into and withdrawals from the fund;
(c)
have clear rules attributing responsibilities for any debts incurred.
2.   Member States shall define the rules for the constitution and management of the mutual funds, in particular for the granting of compensation payments and the eligibility of farmers in the event of crisis, as well as for the administration and monitoring of compliance with these rules. Member States shall ensure that the fund arrangements provide for penalties in case of negligence on the part of the farmer.
The occurrence of incidents mentioned in point (b) of Article 36(1) must be formally recognised as such by the competent authority of the Member State concerned.
3.   The financial contributions referred to in Article 36(1)(b) may only relate to:
(a)
the administrative costs of setting up the mutual fund, spread over a maximum of three years in a degressive manner;
(b)
the amounts paid by the mutual fund as financial compensation to farmers. In addition, the financial contribution may relate to interest on commercial loans taken out by the mutual fund for the purpose of paying the financial compensation to farmers in case of crisis.
Support under point (b) of Article 36(1) shall only be granted to cover for loss caused by the outbreak of adverse climatic events, an animal or plant disease, a pest infestation, or a measure adopted in accordance with Directive 2000/29/EC to eradicate or contain a plant disease or pest or an environmental incident, which destroy more than 30 % of the average annual production of the farmer in the preceding three-year period or a three-year average based on the preceding five-year period, excluding the highest and lowest entry. Indexes may be used in order to calculate the annual production of the farmer. The calculation method used shall permit the determination of the actual loss of an individual farmer in a given year.
No contribution by public funds shall be made to initial capital stock.
4.   As regards animal diseases, financial compensation under point (b) of Article 36(1) may be granted in respect of diseases mentioned in the list of animal diseases established by the World Organisation for Animal Health or in the Annex to Decision 2009/470/EC.
5.   Support shall be limited to the maximum support rate laid down in Annex II.
Member States may limit the costs that are eligible for support by applying:
(a)
ceilings per fund;
(b)
appropriate per unit ceilings.
