Article 15
Advisory services, farm management and farm relief services
1.   Support under this measure shall be granted in order to:
(a)
help farmers, young farmers as defined in this Regulation, forest holders, other land managers and SMEs in rural areas benefit from the use of advisory services for the improvement of the economic and environmental performance as well as the climate friendliness and resilience of their holding, enterprise and/or investment;
(b)
promote the setting up of farm management, farm relief and farm advisory services, as well as forestry advisory services, including the Farm Advisory System referred to in Articles 12 to 14 of Regulation (EU) No 1306/2013;
(c)
promote the training of advisors.
2.   The beneficiary of support provided in paragraph 1(a) and (c) shall be the provider of advice or training. Support under paragraph 1(b) shall be granted to the authority or body selected to set up the farm management, farm relief, farm advisory or forestry advisory service.
3.   The authorities or bodies selected to provide advice shall have appropriate resources in the form of regularly trained and qualified staff and advisory experience and reliability with respect to the fields in which they advise. The beneficiaries under this measure shall be chosen through calls for tenders. The selection procedure shall be governed by public procurement law and shall be open to both public and private bodies. It shall be objective and shall exclude candidates with conflicts of interest.
When providing advice, advisory services shall respect the non-disclosure obligations referred to in Article 13(2) of Regulation (EU) No 1306/2013.
4.   Advice to the individual farmers, young farmers as defined in this Regulation and other land managers shall be linked to at least one Union priority for rural development and shall cover as a minimum one of the following elements:
(a)
obligations at farm level deriving from the statutory management requirements and/or standards for good agricultural and environmental conditions provided for in Chapter I of Title VI of Regulation (EU) No 1306/2013;
(b)
where applicable, the agricultural practices beneficial for the climate and the environment as laid down in Chapter 3 of Title III of Regulation (EU) No 1307/2013 and the maintenance of the agricultural area as referred to in point (c) of Article 4(1) of Regulation (EU) No 1307/2013;
(c)
measures at farm level provided for in rural development programmes aiming at farm modernisation, competitiveness building, sectoral integration, innovation and market orientation, as well as the promotion of entrepreneurship;
(d)
requirements as defined by Member States for implementing Article 11(3) of the Water Framework Directive;
(e)
requirements as defined by Member States, for implementing Article 55 of Regulation (EC) No 1107/2009, in particular compliance with the general principles of integrated pest management as referred to in Article 14 of Directive 2009/128/EC; or
(f)
where relevant, occupational safety standards or safety standards linked to the farm;
(g)
specific advice for farmers setting up for the first time.
Advice may also cover other issues and in particular the information related to climate change mitigation and adaptation, biodiversity and the protection of water as laid down in Annex I to Regulation (EU) No 1307/2013 or issues linked to the economic and environmental performance of the agricultural holding, including competitiveness aspects. This may include advice for the development of short supply chains, organic farming and health aspects of animal husbandry.
5.   Advice to forest holders shall cover, as a minimum, the relevant obligations under Directives 92/43/EEC, 2009/147/EC and the Water Framework Directive. It may also cover issues linked to the economic and environmental performance of the forest holding.
6.   Advice to SMEs may cover issues linked to the economic and environmental performance of the enterprise.
7.   Where duly justified and appropriate, advice may be provided partly in a group, while taking into account the situations of the individual user of advisory services.
8.   Support under points (a) and (c) of paragraph 1 shall be limited to the maximum amounts laid down in Annex II. Support under point (b) of paragraph 1 shall be degressive over a maximum period of five years from setting up.
