Article 39
Income stabilisation tool
1.   Support under point (c) of Article 36(1) shall only be granted where the drop of income exceeds 30 % of the average annual income of the individual farmer in the preceding three-year period or a three-year average based on the preceding five-year period excluding the highest and lowest entry. Income for the purposes of point (c) of Article 36(1) shall refer to the sum of revenues the farmer receives from the market, including any form of public support, deducting input costs. Payments by the mutual fund to farmers shall compensate for less than 70 % of the income lost in the year the producer becomes eligible to receive this assistance.
2.   In order to be eligible for support the mutual fund concerned shall:
(a)
be accredited by the competent authority in accordance with national law;
(b)
have a transparent policy towards payments into and withdrawals from the fund;
(c)
have clear rules attributing responsibilities for any debts incurred.
3.   Member States shall define the rules for the constitution and management of the mutual funds, in particular for the granting of compensation payments to farmers in the event of crisis and for the administration and monitoring of compliance with these rules. Member States shall ensure that the fund arrangements provide for penalties in case of negligence on the part of the farmer.
4.   The financial contributions referred to in point (c) of Article 36(1) may only relate to:
(a)
the administrative costs of setting up the mutual fund, spread over a maximum of three years in a degressive manner;
(b)
the amounts paid by the mutual fund as financial compensation to farmers. In addition, the financial contribution may relate to interest on commercial loans taken out by the mutual fund for the purpose of paying the financial compensation to farmers in case of crisis. No contribution by public funds shall be made to initial capital stock.
5.   Support shall be limited to the maximum rate laid down in Annex II.
