Article 7
Consistency and thematic concentration
1.   Member States shall programme their resources of the ESF+ strand under shared management by prioritising interventions that address the challenges identified in the European Semester, including in their national reform programmes as well as in the relevant country-specific recommendations adopted in accordance with Article 121(2) and Article 148(4) TFEU, and take into account the principles and rights set out in the European Pillar of Social Rights and the national and regional strategies relevant for ESF+ objectives, thereby contributing to the goals set out in Article 174 TFEU.
Member States and, where appropriate, the Commission shall foster synergies and ensure coordination, complementarity and coherence between the ESF+ and other Union funds, programmes and instruments, both in the planning phase and during implementation. Member States and, where appropriate, the Commission shall optimise mechanisms for coordination to avoid duplication of efforts and ensure close cooperation between entities responsible for implementation to deliver coherent and streamlined support actions.
2.   Member States shall allocate an appropriate amount of their resources of the ESF+ strand under shared management to address challenges identified in relevant country-specific recommendations adopted in accordance with Article 121(2) and Article 148(4) TFEU and in the European Semester falling within the scope of the specific objectives of the ESF+ set out in Article 4(1) of this Regulation.
3.   Member States shall allocate an appropriate amount of their resources of the ESF+ strand under shared management for the implementation of the Child Guarantee through targeted actions and structural reforms to tackle child poverty under the specific objectives set out in Article 4(1), points (f) and (h) to (l).
Member States that had an average rate above the Union average of children of less than 18 years old at risk of poverty or social exclusion for the period between 2017 and 2019, on the basis of Eurostat data, shall allocate at least 5 % of their resources of the ESF+ strand under shared management to support targeted actions and structural reforms to tackle child poverty as set out in the first subparagraph.
4.   Member States shall allocate at least 25 % of their resources of the ESF+ strand under shared management to the specific objectives for the social inclusion policy area set out in Article 4(1), points (h) to (l), including the promotion of the socio-economic integration of third-country nationals.
5.   Member States shall allocate at least 3 % of their resources of the ESF+ strand under shared management to support the most deprived persons under the specific objective set out in Article 4(1), point (m), or, in duly justified cases, either the specific objective set out in Article 4(1), point (l), or both of those specific objectives.
The resources shall not be taken into account for verifying compliance with the minimum allocations set out in paragraphs 3 and 4.
6.   Member States shall allocate an appropriate amount of their resources of the ESF+ strand under shared management to targeted actions and structural reforms to support youth employment, vocational education and training, in particular apprenticeships, and the transition from school to work, pathways to reintegrate into education or training and second chance education, in particular in the context of implementing schemes under the Youth Guarantee.
Member States that had an average rate above the Union average of young people of 15 to 29 years of age who are not in employment, education or training for the period between 2017 and 2019, on the basis of Eurostat data, shall allocate at least 12,5 % of their resources of the ESF+ strand under shared management for the years 2021 to 2027 to support the targeted actions and structural reforms as set out in the first subparagraph.
Outermost regions fulfilling the conditions set out in the second subparagraph shall allocate at least 12,5 % of their resources of the ESF+ strand under shared management in their programmes to the targeted actions and structural reforms as set out in the first subparagraph. This allocation shall be taken into account for verifying compliance with the minimum percentage at national level set out in the second subparagraph when applicable.
When implementing targeted actions and structural reforms referred to in this paragraph, Member States shall give priority to inactive and long-term unemployed young people and put in place targeted outreach measures.
7.   Paragraphs 2 to 6 of this Article shall not apply to the specific additional allocation received by the outermost regions and the NUTS level 2 regions fulfilling the criteria laid down in Article 2 of Protocol No 6.
8.   Paragraphs 1 to 6 shall not apply to technical assistance.
