Article 39
Committee set up under Article 163 TFEU
1.   The Commission shall be assisted by the Committee set up under Article 163 TFEU (the ‘ESF+ Committee’).
2.   Each Member State shall appoint one government representative, one representative of the workers’ organisations, one representative of the employers’ organisations and one alternate for each member for a maximum period of seven years. In the absence of a member, the alternate shall be automatically entitled to take part in the proceedings.
3.   The ESF+ Committee shall include one representative from each of the organisations representing workers’ organisations and employers’ organisations at Union level.
4.   The ESF+ Committee, including its working groups referred to in paragraph 7, may invite non-voting representatives of stakeholders to attend its meetings. This may include representatives of the European Investment Bank and the European Investment Fund as well as relevant civil society organisations.
5.   The ESF+ Committee shall be consulted on the planned use of technical assistance referred to in Article 35 of Regulation (EU) 2021/1060 in the case of support from the ESF+ strand under shared management, as well as on other issues having an impact on the implementation of strategies at Union level relevant to the ESF+.
6.   The ESF+ Committee may deliver opinions on:
(a)
questions related to the ESF+ contribution to the implementation of the European Pillar of Social Rights, including country-specific recommendations and European Semester-related priorities, such as national reform programmes;
(b)
issues concerning Regulation (EU) 2021/1060 relevant for the ESF+;
(c)
questions related to the ESF+ referred to it by the Commission other than those referred to in paragraph 5.
The opinions of the ESF+ Committee shall be adopted by an absolute majority of the votes validly cast, and shall be communicated to the European Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions, for information. The Commission shall inform the ESF+ Committee in writing of the manner in which it has taken account of its opinions.
7.   The ESF+ Committee shall set up working groups for each ESF+ strand.
8.   The Commission shall consult the working group dealing with the EaSI strand on the work programme. It shall inform that working group of the manner in which it has taken account of the results of that consultation. That working group shall ensure that a consultation of the work programme with stakeholders, including with representatives of civil society, takes place.
