Article 17
Indicators and reporting
1.   Programmes benefitting from general support from the ESF+ strand under shared management shall use common output and result indicators, as set out in Annex I to monitor progress in implementation. The programmes may also use programme-specific indicators.
2.   Where a Member State allocates its resources to the specific objective set out in Article 4(1), point (l), to target the most deprived persons, in line with the first subparagraph of Article 7(5), the common indicators as set out in Annex II shall apply.
3.   The baseline for common and programme-specific output indicators shall be set at zero. Where relevant to the nature of the operations supported, cumulative quantified milestones and target values of those indicators shall be set in absolute numbers. The reported values of the output indicators shall be expressed in absolute numbers.
4.   The reference value of common and programme-specific result indicators for which a target value for 2029 have been set, shall be fixed using the latest available data or other relevant sources of information. Targets for common result indicators shall be fixed in absolute numbers or as a percentage. Programme-specific result indicators and related targets may be expressed in quantitative or qualitative terms. The reported values of common result indicators shall be expressed in absolute numbers.
5.   Data on the indicators for participants shall only be transmitted when all data required under point 1.1 of Annex I relating to that participant are available.
6.   Where data are available in registers or equivalent sources, Member States may enable the managing authorities and other bodies entrusted with data collection necessary for the monitoring and the evaluation of general support from the ESF+ strand under shared management to obtain data from those registers or equivalent sources, in accordance with Article 6(1), points (c) and (e), of Regulation (EU) 2016/679.
7.   The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 37 to amend the indicators in Annexes I and II where considered necessary to ensure effective assessment of progress in the implementation of programmes. Such amendments shall be proportionate, taking into account the administrative burden borne by Member States and beneficiaries. Delegated acts in accordance with this paragraph shall not change the methodology for data collection as laid down in Annexes I and II.
