Article 19
Principles
1.   The ESF+ support for addressing material deprivation shall be used only to support the distribution of food and goods that are in conformity with the Union law on consumer product safety.
2.   Member States and beneficiaries shall choose the food and/or the basic material assistance on the basis of objective criteria related to the needs of the most deprived persons. The selection criteria for the food, and where appropriate for goods, shall also take into consideration climate-related and environmental aspects, in particular with a view to reduction of food waste and single-use plastics. Where appropriate, the choice of the type of food to be distributed shall be made having considered their contribution to the balanced diet of the most deprived persons.
The food and/or basic material assistance may be provided directly to the most deprived persons or indirectly, for example, through vouchers or cards, in electronic or other form, provided that they can be redeemed only against food and/or basic material assistance. Support for the most deprived persons shall be additional to any social benefit that may be provided to end recipients by national social systems or according to national law.
The food provided for the most deprived persons may be obtained from the use, processing or sale of the products disposed of in accordance with Article 16(2) of Regulation (EU) No 1308/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council (37), provided that this is economically the most favourable option and does not unduly delay the delivery of food to the most deprived persons.
Any amount derived from such a transaction shall be used for the benefit of the most deprived persons, in addition to the amounts already available to the programme.
3.   The Commission and Member States shall ensure that aid provided in the framework of the ESF+ support for addressing material deprivation respects the dignity and prevents stigmatisation of the most deprived persons.
4.   Member States shall complement the delivery of food and/or basic material assistance by accompanying measures, such as referrals to competent services, under the specific objective set out in Article 4(1), point (m), or by promoting the social integration of the most deprived persons under the specific objective set out in Article 4(1), point (l).
