Article 19
Implementation of investment projects and programmes under the Western Balkans Investment Framework
1.   In order to benefit from the leverage of Union financial support to attract additional investment, infrastructure investments supporting the Reform Agendas shall be implemented through the WBIF.
2.   The Commission implementing decision referred to in Article 15 shall lay down the amount of funds to be made available for use under the WBIF.
3.   The Commission shall submit relevant investment project or programme proposals for the opinion of the WBIF Operational Board referred to in Article 35(8) of Regulation (EU) 2021/947 after the adoption of the decision referred to in Article 21(3) of this Regulation.
4.   At least 37 % of the non-repayable financial support channelled through the WBIF shall account to climate objectives.
5.   Financing under the Facility provided from the financial envelope referred to in Article 6(2), point (a), after deduction of the amount of provisioning, shall be implemented under indirect management taking into account a pipeline of investments and shall be gradually provided through contributions paid into the joint fund established under the WBIF for receiving donors contributions.
6.   This financing shall not be made available for investments to be supported by the joint fund until the decision referred to in Article 21(3) has been adopted.
7.   Financing under the Facility provided from the loans as referred to in Article 6(5) of this Regulation, shall be made available through the WBIF under the loan agreement between the Commission and the beneficiaries in accordance with Article 17(2) of this Regulation. Combined for all loan agreements, there shall be maximum twelve requests for disbursements per year from the fund managers of the joint fund referred to in Article 12(2) of this Regulation to the Commission. Investment projects and programmes may receive support from two financing sources, as referred to in paragraphs 2 and 3 of Article 6 of this Regulation, as well as from other Union programmes and instruments, subject to that such support from different sources, programmes and instruments provides for additionality and does not cover the same cost. For each investment project or programme, the Commission shall provide an assessment to the WBIF Operational Board, including on synergies and complementarities with other Union programmes, in particular support provided under Regulation (EU) 2021/1529, with a view to avoiding the duplication of assistance and double funding.
