Article 11
Submission of Reform Agendas
1.   In order to receive any support under the Facility, each beneficiary shall submit to the Commission a Reform Agenda for the duration of the Facility, based on the structural reforms part of the latest Economic Reform Programme and the related Joint Policy Guidance agreed at the Economic and Financial Dialogue in May 2023, its growth strategy where applicable, the enlargement policy framework and the Economic and Investment Plan for the Western Balkans.
2.   The Reform Agendas shall provide an overarching framework to achieve the general and specific objectives set out in Article 3, setting out the reforms to be undertaken by the beneficiary, as well as investment areas. The Reform Agendas shall comprise measures for the implementation of reforms through a comprehensive and coherent package. In the areas of the fundamentals of the enlargement process, including the rule of law, the fight against corruption, including high-level corruption, fundamental rights and the freedom of expression, the Reform Agendas shall reflect the assessments in the enlargement policy framework.
3.   The Reform Agendas shall be consistent with the latest macroeconomic and fiscal policy framework submitted to the Commission in the context of the Economic and Financial Dialogue with the Union.
4.   The Reform Agendas shall be consistent with and support the reform priorities identified in the context of the beneficiary’s accession path, and in other relevant documents, such as the Stabilisation and Association Agreement, the Energy and Climate Plan, the Nationally Determined Contribution under the Paris Agreement and the ambition to reach climate neutrality by 2050 at the latest.
5.   The Reform Agendas shall respect the general principles set out in Article 4.
6.   The Reform Agendas shall be prepared in an inclusive and transparent manner, in consultation with social partners and civil society organisations.
7.   The Commission shall invite the beneficiaries to submit their respective Reform Agendas within three months of the entry into force of this Regulation. The Commission shall transmit the beneficiaries’ Reform Agendas to the European Parliament and the Council as soon as they are received by the Commission.
8.   In the event that a redistribution of support under the Facility leads to a beneficiary receiving additional support, the Commission shall invite that beneficiary to submit an amended Reform Agenda for the remaining duration of the Facility within three months. The Commission shall inform the European Parliament and the Council prior to taking any decision on the redistribution.
