Article 31
The sale-of-business tool
1.   Member States shall ensure that resolution authorities have the power to transfer to a purchaser other than a bridge undertaking:
(a)
shares or other instruments of ownership issued by an undertaking under resolution;
(b)
all or any assets, rights or liabilities of an undertaking under resolution.
2.   A transfer made pursuant to paragraph 1 shall be made on commercial terms, having regard to the circumstances, and in accordance with the Union State aid framework.
Resolution authorities shall take all reasonable steps to obtain commercial terms for the transfer that are consistent with the valuation conducted under Article 23, having regard to the circumstances of the case.
3.   Resolution authorities may, with the consent of the purchaser, revert the executed transfers where justified by the circumstances of the case. The undertaking under resolution or the original owners shall be obliged to take back any transferred shares or other instruments of ownership, or assets, rights or liabilities.
4.   Purchasers shall be required to have the appropriate authorisation to carry out the business they acquire when a transfer as referred to in paragraph 1 is made. Supervisory authorities shall ensure that any application for such authorisation is considered, in conjunction with the transfer, in a timely manner.
5.   By way of derogation from Articles 57 to 62 of Directive 2009/138/EC, where a transfer of shares or of other instruments of ownership by virtue of an application of the sale-of-business tool would result in the acquisition of or increase in a qualifying holding in an insurance or reinsurance undertaking as referred to in Article 57(1) of Directive 2009/138/EC, the supervisory authority of that insurance or reinsurance undertaking shall carry out the assessment required under those Articles in a timely manner that does not delay the application of the sale-of-business tool or prevent the resolution action from achieving the resolution objectives.
6.   Member States shall ensure that, where the supervisory authority has not completed the assessment referred to in paragraph 5 from the date of the transfer, the following apply:
(a)
such a transfer of shares or other instruments of ownership to the acquirer shall have immediate legal effect;
(b)
during the assessment period and during any divestment period provided for in point (f), the acquirer’s voting rights attached to such shares or other instruments of ownership shall be suspended and vested solely in the resolution authority, which shall have no obligation to exercise any such voting rights and which shall have no liability whatsoever for exercising or refraining from exercising any such voting rights;
(c)
during the assessment period and during any divestment period provided for in point (f), the penalties and other measures for infringing the requirements for acquisitions or disposals of qualifying holdings laid down in Article 62 of Directive 2009/138/EC shall not apply to such a transfer of shares or other instruments of ownership;
(d)
promptly upon completion of its assessment, the supervisory authority shall notify the resolution authority and the acquirer in writing of whether it approves or, in accordance with Article 58(4) of Directive 2009/138/EC, opposes such a transfer of shares or other instruments of ownership to the acquirer;
(e)
where the supervisory authority approves such a transfer of shares or other instruments of ownership to the acquirer, the voting rights attached to such shares or other instruments of ownership shall be deemed to be fully vested in the acquirer immediately upon receipt by the resolution authority and the acquirer of such an approval notice from the supervisory authority;
(f)
where the supervisory authority opposes such a transfer of shares or other instruments of ownership to the acquirer:
(i)
the voting rights attached to such shares or other instruments of ownership as provided for in point (b) shall remain in full force and effect;
(ii)
the resolution authority may require the acquirer to divest such shares or other instruments of ownership within a divestment period determined by the resolution authority having taken into account prevailing market conditions;
(iii)
where the acquirer does not comply with the request provided for in point (ii), the supervisory authority, with the consent of the resolution authority, may impose on the acquirer penalties and other measures for infringing the requirements for acquisitions or disposals of qualifying holdings laid down in Article 62 of Directive 2009/138/EC.
7.   For the purpose of exercising the rights to provide services or to establish itself in another Member State in accordance with Directive 2009/138/EC, the purchaser shall be considered to be a continuation of the undertaking under resolution, and may continue to exercise any such right that was exercised by the undertaking under resolution in respect of the assets, rights or liabilities transferred.
