Article 79
Cooperation with third-country authorities
1.   This Article shall apply in respect of cooperation with a third country unless and until an international agreement as referred to in Article 75(1) enters into force with the relevant third country. It shall also apply following the entry into force of such an international agreement to the extent that the subject matter of this Article is not governed by that agreement.
2.   EIOPA may conclude non-binding framework cooperation arrangements with relevant third-country authorities. The framework cooperation agreements shall establish processes and arrangements between the participating authorities for sharing information necessary for and cooperation in carrying out some or all or the following tasks and exercising some or all of the following powers in relation to insurance or reinsurance undertakings or groups:
(a)
the development of resolution plans in accordance with Articles 9 to 12 and similar requirements under the law of the relevant third countries;
(b)
the assessment of the resolvability of such insurance and reinsurance undertakings and groups, in accordance with Articles 13 and 14 and similar requirements under the law of the relevant third countries;
(c)
the application of powers to address or remove impediments to resolvability pursuant to Articles 15 and 16 and any similar powers under the law of the relevant third countries;
(d)
the application of preventive measures pursuant to Article 141 of Directive 2009/138/EC and similar powers under the law of the relevant third countries;
(e)
the application of resolution tools and exercise of resolution powers and similar powers exercisable by the relevant third-country authorities.
3.   Supervisory or resolution authorities, where appropriate, may conclude cooperation arrangements with relevant third-country authorities in line with the EIOPA framework arrangement referred to in paragraph 2.
4.   Member States shall notify EIOPA of any cooperation arrangements that resolution authorities and supervisory authorities have concluded in accordance with this Article.
