Article 16
Power to address or remove impediments to resolvability: group treatment
1.   A group-level resolution authority, together with the resolution authorities of subsidiary undertakings, after having consulted the college of supervisors established in accordance with Article 248 of Directive 2009/138/EC, shall consider the assessment referred to in Article 14 within the resolution college and shall take all reasonable steps to reach a joint decision as referred to in Article 17 on the application of measures identified in accordance with Article 15(4) in relation to all relevant group entities.
2.   The group-level resolution authority, in cooperation with the group supervisor and with EIOPA, in accordance with Article 25(1) of Regulation (EU) No 1094/2010, shall prepare a report and submit it to the ultimate parent undertaking and to the resolution authorities of subsidiaries, which shall provide that report to the subsidiary undertakings within their remit. The report shall be prepared after having consulted the supervisory authorities, and shall analyse the substantive impediments to the effective application of resolution tools and the effective exercise of resolution powers in relation to the group. The report shall recommend any proportionate and targeted measures that, in the view of the group-level resolution authority, are necessary or appropriate to remove those impediments, considering the impact of those measures on the group’s business model.
3.   Within four months of the date of receipt of the report, the ultimate parent undertaking may submit observations and propose to the group-level resolution authority alternative measures to address or remove the impediments identified in the report.
The group-level resolution authority, after having consulted the group supervisor, shall assess whether those measures effectively address or remove the substantive impediments.
4.   The group-level resolution authority shall communicate any measure proposed by the ultimate parent undertaking to the authorities that are members of or participate in the resolution college. The group-level resolution authority and the resolution authorities of the subsidiary undertakings, after having consulted the supervisory authorities, shall do everything within their power to reach a joint decision, as referred to in Article 17, within the resolution college regarding the identification of substantive impediments, and, where necessary, regarding the assessment of the measures proposed by the ultimate parent undertaking and the measures required by the authorities in order to address or remove the impediments. When doing so, they shall take into account the potential impact of the measures in all Member States where the group operates.
