Article 32
Bridge undertaking tool
1.   Member States shall ensure that resolution authorities have the power to transfer to a bridge undertaking:
(a)
shares or other instruments of ownership issued by one or more undertakings under resolution;
(b)
all or any assets, rights or liabilities of one or more undertakings under resolution.
2.   The bridge undertaking shall be a legal person that meets all of the following requirements:
(a)
it is wholly or partially owned by one or more public authorities which may include the resolution authority or, where applicable, an insurance guarantee scheme and is controlled by the resolution authority;
(b)
it is created for the purpose of receiving and holding some or all of the shares or other instruments of ownership issued by an undertaking under resolution or some or all of the assets, rights and liabilities of one or more undertakings under resolution with a view to achieving the resolution objectives and selling the undertaking under resolution.
3.   When applying the bridge undertaking tool, resolution authorities shall ensure that the total value of liabilities transferred to the bridge undertaking does not exceed the total value of the rights and assets transferred from the undertaking under resolution.
4.   Following an application of the bridge undertaking tool, resolution authorities may, where justified by the circumstances, revert the executed transfers, and the undertaking under resolution or the original owners shall be obliged to take back any transferred assets, rights or liabilities, or shares or other instruments of ownership, where justified by the circumstances of the case, in any of the following situations:
(a)
the possibility that the specific shares or other instruments of ownership, assets, rights or liabilities might be transferred back is stated expressly in the instrument by which the transfer was made;
(b)
the specific shares or other instruments of ownership, assets, rights or liabilities do not fall within the classes of, or meet the conditions for transfer of, shares or other instruments of ownership, assets, rights or liabilities specified in the instrument by which the transfer was made.
A transfer back as referred to in the first subparagraph may be made within any period and shall comply with any other conditions stated in the instrument by which the transfer was made.
5.   Following an application of the bridge undertaking tool, resolution authorities may transfer shares or other instruments of ownership, or assets, rights or liabilities from the bridge undertaking to a third-party purchaser.
6.   A bridge undertaking shall be considered to be a continuation of the undertaking under resolution, and be able to continue to exercise any right that was exercised by the undertaking under resolution in respect of the assets, rights or liabilities transferred.
7.   The objectives of a bridge undertaking shall not imply any duty or responsibility to shareholders or creditors of the undertaking under resolution. The members of the administrative, management or supervisory body or senior management of the bridge undertaking shall have no liability to such shareholders or creditors for acts or omissions in the discharge of their duties, unless such acts or omissions involved gross negligence or serious misconduct under national law which directly affected the rights of such shareholders or creditors.
Member States may further limit the liability of a bridge undertaking and of the members of its administrative, management or supervisory body or senior management in accordance with national law for acts and omissions in the discharge of their duties.
