Article 67

Ex ante judicial approval and rights to challenge decisions
1.   Member States may require that a decision to take a crisis prevention measure or a crisis management measure is subject to ex ante judicial approval, provided that in respect of a decision to take a crisis management measure, in accordance with national law, the procedure relating to the application for approval and the court’s consideration is expeditious.
2.   Member States shall provide in national law for a right of appeal against a decision to take a crisis prevention measure or a decision to exercise any power, other than a crisis management measure, under this Directive.
3.   Member States shall ensure that all persons affected by a decision to take a crisis management measure have the right to appeal against that decision.
Member States shall ensure that the review of a crisis management measure is expeditious and that national courts use the economic assessments of the facts carried out by the resolution authority as a basis for their own assessment.
4.   The right to appeal referred to in paragraph 3 shall be subject to the following requirements:
(a)
the lodging of an appeal shall not entail any automatic suspension of the effects of the challenged decision;
(b)
the decision of the resolution authority shall be immediately enforceable and shall give rise to a rebuttable presumption that a suspension of its enforcement would be against the public interest.
Where it is necessary to protect the interests of third parties acting in good faith who have acquired shares, other instruments of ownership, assets, rights or liabilities of an undertaking under resolution by virtue of the use of resolution tools or the exercise of resolution powers by a resolution authority, the annulment of a decision of a resolution authority shall not affect any subsequent administrative acts or transactions concluded by the resolution authority concerned which were based on the annulled decision. In that case, remedies for a wrongful decision or action by the resolution authorities shall be limited to compensation for the loss suffered by the applicant as a result of the annulled decision or act.
