Article 22
General principles governing resolution
1.   Member States shall ensure that resolution authorities, when they apply resolution tools and exercise resolution powers, take all appropriate measures to ensure that the resolution action is taken in accordance with the following principles:
(a)
the shareholders of the undertaking under resolution bear first losses;
(b)
creditors of the undertaking under resolution bear losses after the shareholders in accordance with the order of priority of their claims under normal insolvency proceedings, save as expressly provided for otherwise in this Directive;
(c)
the administrative, management or supervisory body and the senior management of the undertaking under resolution are replaced, except where the retention, in whole or in part, of that body or the senior management is considered necessary for the achievement of the resolution objectives;
(d)
the administrative, management or supervisory body and the senior management of the undertaking under resolution provide all assistance necessary for the achievement of the resolution objectives;
(e)
natural and legal persons are made liable under civil or criminal law for their responsibility for the failure of the undertaking under resolution;
(f)
except where otherwise provided for in this Directive, creditors of the same class are treated equally;
(g)
no shareholder or creditor incurs greater losses than they would have incurred if the insurance or reinsurance undertaking had been wound up under normal insolvency proceedings in accordance with the safeguards in Articles 55 to 57;
(h)
resolution action is taken in accordance with the safeguards in this Directive.
2.   Where the insurance or reinsurance undertaking is part of a group, resolution authorities shall apply resolution tools and exercise resolution powers in a way that minimises, in particular in the countries where the group operates:
(a)
the impact on other group entities and on the group as a whole;
(b)
the adverse effects on policy holders, the real economy and financial stability in the Union and in Member States.
3.   When applying resolution tools and exercising resolution powers, Member States shall ensure that they comply with the Union State aid framework.
4.   Where resolution tools are applied, the entity to which those tools are applied shall be considered the subject of bankruptcy proceedings or analogous insolvency proceedings for the purposes of Article 5(1) of Council Directive 2001/23/EC (19).
5.   When applying resolution tools and exercising resolution powers, resolution authorities shall inform and consult employee representatives of the undertaking concerned where appropriate.
6.   Resolution authorities shall apply resolution tools and exercise resolution powers without prejudice to provisions on the representation of employees in management bodies as provided for in national law or practice.
