Article 52
Contractual recognition of resolution stay powers
1.   Member States shall require entities referred to in Article 1(1), points (a) to (e), to include in any financial contract which they enter into and which is governed by third-country law, terms by which the parties recognise that the financial contract may be subject to the exercise of powers by the resolution authority to suspend or restrict rights and obligations under Articles 49, 50, and 51, and recognise that they are bound by the requirements of Article 48.
2.   Member States may also require that ultimate parent undertakings ensure that their third-country subsidiary undertakings which are entities referred to in Article 1(1), points (a) to (e), include, in the financial contracts referred to in paragraph 1, terms to exclude that the exercise of the power of the resolution authority to suspend or restrict rights and obligations of the ultimate parent undertaking, in accordance with paragraph 1, constitutes a valid ground for early termination, suspension, modification, netting, exercise of set-off rights or enforcement of security interests on those contracts.
3.   Paragraph 1 shall apply to any financial contract which:
(a)
creates a new obligation, or materially amends an existing obligation after the entry into force of the provisions adopted at national level to transpose this Article;
(b)
provides for the exercise of one or more termination rights or rights to enforce security interests to which Article 48, 49, 50 or 51 would apply if the financial contract were governed by the laws of a Member State.
4.   The fact that an entity as referred to in Article 1(1), points (a) to (e), does not include in its financial contracts the contractual terms referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article shall not prevent the resolution authority from applying the powers referred to in Articles 48, 49, 50 and 51 in relation to those financial contracts.
5.   EIOPA shall develop draft regulatory technical standards to specify the contents of the contractual terms referred to in paragraph 1, taking into account the different business models of the entities referred to therein.
EIOPA shall submit those draft regulatory technical standards to the Commission by 29 July 2027.
Power is delegated to the Commission to supplement this Directive by adopting the regulatory technical standards referred to in the first subparagraph in accordance with Articles 10 to 14 of Regulation (EU) No 1094/2010.
