Article 17
Joint decisions
1.   Group supervisors, supervisory authorities, group-level resolution authorities and resolution authorities shall endeavour to reach the joint decisions referred to in Article 8(2), Article 11(4) and Article 16(4), as applicable, within four months of the date of:
(a)
the transmission by the group supervisor of the group pre-emptive recovery plan in accordance with Article 7(6);
(b)
the transmission by the group-level resolution authority of the information referred to in the Article 11(1), second subparagraph;
(c)
the submission of any observations or the proposal of any alternative measures by the ultimate parent undertaking, or the expiry of the period referred to in Article 16(3), whichever is earlier.
EIOPA may, at the request of a supervisory authority or a resolution authority, assist the group supervisors, supervisory authorities, group-level resolution authorities and resolution authorities in reaching a joint decision in accordance with Article 31(2), point (c), of Regulation (EU) No 1094/2010.
2.   In the absence of a joint decision within the period referred to in paragraph 1, first subparagraph, introductory wording, on any of the following matters, the group supervisor or the group-level resolution authority, as applicable, shall make its own decision thereon:
(a)
the review and assessment of the group pre-emptive recovery plan;
(b)
any measures the ultimate parent undertaking is required to take in accordance with Article 6(4) and (5);
(c)
the group resolution plan;
(d)
the measures referred to in Article 16.
The decision made by the group supervisor or the group-level resolution authority, as applicable, shall be fully reasoned and shall take into account the views and reservations of other supervisory authorities or resolution authorities, as applicable, expressed during the period referred to in paragraph 1, first subparagraph, introductory wording. The decision shall be provided to the ultimate parent undertaking and to the other authorities concerned.
3.   In the absence of a joint decision within the period referred to in paragraph 1, first subparagraph, introductory wording, between the supervisory authorities or resolution authorities on any of the following matters, each supervisory authority or resolution authority, as applicable, of a subsidiary undertaking shall make its own decision thereon:
(a)
whether a pre-emptive recovery plan on an individual basis is to be drawn up for the insurance or reinsurance undertakings under its jurisdiction as referred to in Article 8(2);
(b)
the application at subsidiary level of the measures referred to in Article 6(4) and (5);
(c)
the identification of the substantive impediments, and, where necessary, the assessment of the measures proposed by the ultimate parent undertaking and the measures required by the authorities to address or remove those impediments, as referred to in Article 16(1).
4.   In the absence of a joint decision between the resolution authorities on the adoption of the group resolution plan, as referred to Article 11(4), within the period referred to in paragraph 1, first subparagraph, introductory wording, of this Article, each resolution authority responsible for a subsidiary undertaking shall make its own decision and shall draw up and keep updated a resolution plan for the entities under its jurisdiction. Each resolution authority shall notify its decision to the other members of the resolution college.
5.   Each of the decisions of supervisory or resolution authorities in accordance with paragraph 3 or 4 shall be fully reasoned and shall take into account the views and reservations of the other supervisory authorities, resolution authorities, group supervisors or group-level resolution authorities, as applicable.
6.   The supervisory authorities or resolution authorities that do not disagree with a decision as referred to in paragraphs 3 and 4 may reach a joint decision on a group pre-emptive recovery plan or group resolution plan covering group entities under their jurisdictions.
7.   Where, by the end of the period referred to in paragraph 1, first subparagraph, introductory wording, any of the supervisory authorities or resolution authorities concerned has referred a matter to EIOPA in accordance with Article 19 of Regulation (EU) No 1094/2010, the group supervisor, the group-level resolution authority, the supervisory authority or the resolution authority concerned, as applicable, shall defer its decision under paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 of this Article, await any decision that EIOPA may take in accordance with Article 19(3) of that Regulation, and take its decision in accordance with the decision of EIOPA. The period referred to in paragraph 1, first subparagraph, introductory wording, of this Article shall be deemed to be the conciliation phase as referred to in Article 19(2) of that Regulation. EIOPA shall take its decision within one month. The matter shall not be referred to EIOPA after the end of the period referred to in paragraph 1, first subparagraph, introductory wording, or after a joint decision has been reached. In the absence of a decision by EIOPA within one month after the referral to EIOPA was made, the decision of the group supervisor, group-level resolution authority, supervisory authority or resolution authority for the group or the subsidiary undertaking at an individual level, as applicable, shall apply.
8.   The joint decisions referred to in Article 8(2), Article 11(4), Article 16(4) and paragraph 6 of this Article and the decisions referred to in paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 of this Article shall be recognised as conclusive and shall be applied by the supervisory authorities or resolution authorities in the Member States concerned.
9.   Where joint decisions are taken pursuant to Article 11(4) and, in respect of group resolution plans, paragraph 6 of this Article and where a resolution authority assesses that the subject matter of a disagreement regarding group resolution plans impinges on the fiscal responsibilities of its Member State, the group-level resolution authority shall initiate a reassessment of the group resolution plan.

TITLE III


RESOLUTION

