Article 82
Administrative penalties and other administrative measures
1.   Without prejudice to the powers of resolution and supervisory authorities laid down in this Directive and Directive 2009/138/EC and the right of Member States to provide for and impose criminal penalties, Member States shall lay down rules on administrative penalties and other administrative measures applicable where the national provisions transposing this Directive have not been complied with, and shall take all measures necessary to ensure that they are implemented.
Member States that decide not to lay down rules for administrative penalties or other administrative measures for infringements which are subject to national criminal law shall communicate to the Commission the criminal law provisions concerned.
The administrative penalties and other administrative measures provided for shall be effective, proportionate and dissuasive.
2.   Member States shall ensure that, in the event of an infringement, administrative penalties or other administrative measures can be applied, subject to the conditions laid down in national law, to the members of the administrative, management or supervisory body, and to other natural persons who under national law are responsible for the infringement.
3.   The powers to impose administrative penalties and other administrative measures provided for in this Directive shall be attributed to resolution authorities or to supervisory authorities, depending on the type of infringement. Resolution authorities and supervisory authorities shall have all information-gathering and investigatory powers that are necessary for the exercise of their respective functions. In the exercise of their powers to impose administrative penalties or other administrative measures, resolution authorities and supervisory authorities shall cooperate closely to ensure that administrative penalties or other administrative measures produce the desired results and coordinate their action when dealing with cross-border cases.
4.   Resolution authorities and supervisory authorities shall exercise their administrative powers to impose penalties and other administrative measures in accordance with this Directive and national law in any of the following ways:
(a)
directly;
(b)
in collaboration with other authorities;
(c)
under their responsibility by delegation to other authorities;
(d)
by application to the competent judicial authorities.
5.   Member States shall ensure that decisions taken by the resolution authorities and supervisory authorities in accordance with this Title are subject to a right of appeal.
