Article 9
Programming
1.   Cross-border cooperation under this Regulation shall be carried out in the framework of multi-annual programmes covering cooperation for a border or a group of borders and comprising multi-annual measures which pursue a consistent set of priorities and which may be implemented with the support of Community assistance (hereinafter joint operational programmes). The joint operational programmes shall be based on the strategy papers referred to in Article 7(3).
2.   Joint operational programmes for land borders and sea crossings of significant importance shall be established for each border at the appropriate territorial level and include eligible territorial units belonging to one or more Member States and one or more partner countries.
3.   Joint operational programmes for sea basins shall be multilateral and include eligible territorial units facing a common sea basin belonging to several participating countries, including at least one Member State and one partner country, taking into account the institutional systems and the principle of partnership. They may include bilateral activities supporting cooperation between one Member State and one partner country. These programmes shall be closely coordinated with trans-national cooperation programmes having a partially overlapping geographical coverage and having been established in the European Union pursuant to Regulation (EC) No 1083/2006.
4.   Joint operational programmes shall be established by the Member States and partner countries concerned at the appropriate territorial level, in accordance with their institutional system and taking into account the principle of partnership referred to in Article 4. They shall normally cover a period of seven years running from 1 January 2007 to 31 December 2013.
5.   Countries, other than the participating countries, which face a common sea basin where a joint operational programme is being established may be associated with that joint operational programme and benefit from Community assistance under the conditions determined in the implementing rules referred to in Article 11.
6.   Within one year of the approval of the strategy papers referred to in Article 7(3), the participating countries shall jointly submit proposals for joint operational programmes to the Commission. The Commission shall adopt each joint operational programme after assessing its consistency with this Regulation and the implementing rules.
7.   Joint operational programmes may be revised at the initiative of the participating countries, participating border regions or the Commission to take into account changes in cooperation priorities, socio-economic developments, the results observed from implementation of the measures concerned and from the monitoring and evaluation process, and the need to adjust the amounts of aid available and reallocate resources.
8.   Following the adoption of the joint operational programmes, the Commission shall conclude a financing agreement with the partner countries in accordance with the relevant provisions of Council Regulation (EC, Euratom) No 1605/2002 of 25 June 2002 on the Financial Regulation applicable to the general budget of the European Communities (11). The financing agreement shall include the legal provisions necessary for the implementation of the joint operational programme and should also be signed by the joint managing authority referred to in Article 10.
9.   Participating countries shall, taking into account the principle of partnership, jointly select those actions consistent with the priorities and measures of the joint operational programme that will receive Community assistance.
10.   In specific and duly justified cases, where:
(a)
a joint operational programme cannot be established owing to problems arising in relations between participating countries or between the European Union and a partner country,
(b)
by 30 June 2010, at the latest, the participating countries have not yet submitted to the Commission a joint operational programme,
(c)
the partner country does not sign the financing agreement by the end of the year following the adoption of the programme,
(d)
the joint operational programme cannot be implemented owing to problems arising in relations between participating countries,
the Commission, following consultations with the Member State(s) concerned, shall take the necessary steps to allow the Member State concerned to use the ERDF contribution to the programme pursuant to Regulation (EC) No 1083/2006.
