Article 6
Participation of accession candidate countries
1.   LIFE shall be open to the accession candidate central and east European countries in accordance with the conditions referred to in the Association Agreements concluded with those countries and on the basis of provisions of the decision of the Association Council competent for each country concerned.
2.   Proposals for projects to be financed under LIFE-nature and LIFE-environment shall be forwarded to the Commission by the national authorities of the countries concerned within the time limits fixed by the Commission in accordance with Article 3(4) and Article 4(5) respectively. Where projects involve more than one country, proposals shall be forwarded by the country in which the project coordinating body is located.
3.   Proposals which meet the general criteria set out in Article 2 and the specific criteria set out in Article 3(5)(b) and Article 4(6) and (8) shall be taken into consideration for Community financial support.
4.   A summary of the main points and of the content of the proposals received from the national authorities of the countries concerned shall be sent to the Member States by the Commission. On request, it shall place the original documents at the disposal of the Member States for consultation.
5.   Projects considered for LIFE financial support shall be subject either to the procedure set out in Article 3(7) or to that set out in Article 11 according to the type of project proposed.
6.   The projects approved shall give rise to a contract or an agreement between the Commission and the beneficiaries setting out the amount of financial assistance, the financial procedures and controls, as well as all the specific technical conditions of the approved action. The list of proposals accepted shall be sent to the Member States.
7.   Where conditions and provisions equivalent to those referred to in paragraph 1 have been established for the other accession candidate countries, LIFE will be open for participation by those countries in accordance with paragraphs 2 to 6. Countries participating under this Article may not participate under Article 5.
8.   The annual breakdown of appropriations for the co-financing of the instrument by the countries referred to in paragraphs 1 and 7 is published in the general budget of the European Union, Section III, Part B, Annex IV.
