Article 4
LIFE-environment
1.   The specific objective of LIFE-environment shall be to contribute to the development of innovative and integrated techniques and methods and to the further development of Community environment policy.
2.   The following projects and/or measures shall be eligible for LIFE-environment:
(a)
demonstration projects which further the objective set out in paragraph 1 and:
—
integrate considerations on the environment and on sustainable development in land-use development and planning, including in urban and coastal areas, or
—
promote the sustainable management of groundwater and surface water, or
—
minimise the environmental impact of economic activities, notably through the development of clean technologies and by placing the emphasis on prevention, including the reduction of emission of gases having a greenhouse effect, or
—
prevent, reuse, recover and recycle waste of all kinds and ensure the sound management of waste streams, or
—
reduce the environmental impact of products through an integrated approach to production, distribution, consumption and handling at the end of their lifetime, including the development of environmentally-friendly products;
(b)
projects which are preparatory to the development of new Community environmental actions and instruments, and/or to the updating of environmental legislation and policies;
(c)
accompanying measures required:
(i)
to disseminate information on the exchange of experience between projects;
(ii)
to evaluate, monitor, and promote the actions undertaken during this implementation phase of the LIFE instrument and during the first two phases, and disseminate information on the experience gained and on the transfer of results obtained with such actions.
3.   Financial assistance shall be provided by co-financing of projects.
The rate of Community financial support shall be a maximum of 30 % of the eligible cost of the project for projects generating substantial net revenue. In this case, the beneficiaries' contribution to the financing shall be at least as much as the Community support.
The rate of Community financial support to all other applicants shall be a maximum of 50 % of the eligible cost of the project.
The rate of Community financial support for the accompanying measures shall be a maximum of 100 % of their cost.
4.   As far as demonstration projects are concerned, guidelines will be established by the Commission, after being subject to the procedure set out in Article 11, and published in the Official Journal of the European Communities. The guidelines shall promote synergy between demonstration actions and the guiding principles of Community environmental policy with a view to sustainable development.
5.   Proposals for projects to be financed pursuant to paragraph 2(a) shall be forwarded to the Commission by the Member States. Where projects involve more than one Member State, proposals shall be forwarded by the Member State in which the project coordinating body is located.
The Commission shall fix annually the date of forwarding of proposals and shall decide on the proposals in accordance with paragraph 10.
6.   Proposals shall only be considered for financial support, in accordance with paragraph 10, where they comply with the requirements of Article 2 and paragraph (2)(a) of this Article and meet the following criteria:
(a)
providing solutions to a problem which arises very often in the Community or is of great concern to some Member States
(b)
being innovative by virtue of the technology or the method applied
(c)
setting an example and representing progress compared with the current situation
(d)
being capable of promoting the dissemination and widest possible application of practices technologies and/or products conducive to environmental protection
(e)
aiming at developing and transferring know-how which can be used in identical or similar situations
(f)
promoting cooperation in the environmental field
(g)
having a potential satisfactory cost-benefit ratio from an environmental point of view
(h)
promoting integration of environmental considerations into activities whose main aims are economic and social.
When these proposals are considered, their employment implications should also be taken into account, where appropriate.
7.   The following costs shall be considered ineligible:
(a)
land purchase
(b)
studies not specifically addressing the objective aimed at by the financed projects
(c)
investments in major infrastructures or investments of a non-innovative structural nature, including activities already confirmed on an industrial scale
(d)
research and technological development activities.
8.   At the Commission's initiative:
(a)
projects to be financed pursuant to paragraph 2(b) and accompanying measures to be financed pursuant to paragraph 2(c)(i) shall, after consultation of the committee mentioned in Article 11, be the subject of calls for expression of interest. Member States may submit proposals on projects to be financed pursuant to paragraph 2(b) to the Commission;
(b)
accompanying measures to be financed pursuant to paragraph 2(c)(ii) shall be the subject of calls for expression of interest.
All calls for expression of interest shall be published in the Official Journal of the European Communities where the specific criteria to be met will be set out.
9.   A summary of the main points and of the content of the proposals received under paragraph 2(a) and (b) shall be sent to the Member States by the Commission. On request, it shall place the original documents at the disposal of the Member States for consultation.
10.   Projects considered for financial support shall be subject to the procedure set out in Article 11.
11.   An outline decision shall be adopted by the Commission and addressed to the Member States on the projects which have been accepted and individual decisions shall be addressed to the beneficiaries laying down the amount of financial assistance, the financial procedures and controls, and the specific technical conditions of the project approved.
