Article 5
LIFE-third countries
1.   The specific objective of LIFE-third countries shall be to contribute to the establishment of capacities and administrative structures needed in the environmental sector and in the development of environmental policy and action programmes in third countries bordering on the Mediterranean and the Baltic Sea other than the countries of central and eastern Europe which have concluded Association Agreements with the European Community and are referred to in Article 6(1).
2.   The following shall be eligible for LIFE-third countries:
(a)
technical assistance projects which further the objective set out in paragraph 1;
(b)
accompanying measures required for evaluating, monitoring and promoting the actions undertaken during this implementation phase of the LIFE instrument and during the first two phases thereof, for the exchange of experience between projects and for the dissemination of information on the experience gained and on the results obtained with such actions.
3.   Financial assistance shall be provided by co-financing of projects and accompanying measures. The rate of Community financial support shall be a maximum of 70 % of the cost of the projects referred to in paragraph 2(a) and a maximum of 100 % of the cost of the accompanying measures referred to in paragraph 2(b).
4.   Proposals for projects to be financed under paragraph 2(a) from third countries shall be submitted to the Commission by the relevant national authorities. Where projects involve more than one country, proposals shall be submitted by the country in which the project coordinating body is located or by the international organisation acting to protect the environment in the geographical area concerned.
The Commission shall fix annually the date of forwarding of proposals and shall decide on the proposals in accordance with paragraph 7.
5.   Proposals shall be considered for financial support, in accordance with paragraph 7, only where they comply with the requirements of Article 2 and paragraph (2)(a) of this Article and meet the following criteria:
(a)
be of interest to the Community, notably through their contribution to implementing regional and international guidelines and agreements;
(b)
contribute to an approach promoting sustainable development at international, national or regional level;
(c)
provide solutions to major environmental problems in the region and the relevant sector.
Priority will be given to projects which will promote cooperation at the transfrontier, transnational or regional level.
6.   A summary of the main points and the content of the proposals received from the third countries shall be sent to the Member States by the Commission.
On request, it shall place the original documents at the disposal of the Member States for consultation.
7.   Projects considered for financial support shall be subject to the procedure set out in Article 11. Without prejudice to this procedure, the committee set up by Article 21 of Directive 92/43/EEC shall be consulted before a decision is taken on projects concerning nature protection. The Commission shall adopt a decision concerning the list of projects selected.
8.   The projects approved shall give rise to a contract between the Commission and the beneficiaries setting out the amount of financial assistance, the financial procedures and controls, as well as all the specific technical conditions of the approved project. The list of proposals accepted shall be sent to the Member States.
9.   At the Commission's initiative, accompanying measures to be financed under paragraph 2(b) shall be the subject of calls for expression of interest published in the Official Journal of the European Communities and setting out the specific criteria to be met.
