Whereas:
(1)
Council Regulation (EEC) No 1973/92 of 21 May 1992 establishing a Financial Instrument for the Environment (LIFE) (5) was adopted to contribute to the implementation and development of Community environment policy and of environmental legislation.
(2)
Council Regulation (EEC) No 1973/92 was substantially amended by Regulation (EC) No 1404/96 (6); with a view to further contributing to the implementation, updating and development of Community environment policy and of environmental legislation, in particular as regards the integration of the environment into other policies, and to sustainable development in the Community, amendments are to be made to Council Regulation (EEC) No 1973/72, which should, for reasons of clarity, be recast and replaced by this Regulation.
(3)
The Financial Instrument for the Environment, LIFE, is being implemented in phases; the second phase ended on 31 December 1999.
(4)
Given the positive contribution of LIFE to the attainment of the objectives of Community policy on the environment and in accordance with Article 14 of Regulation (EEC) No 1973/92, a third phase for a period of five years ending on 31 December 2004 should be set in motion.
(5)
LIFE should be reinforced as a specific financial instrument, complementary with other Community instruments, without however limiting LIFE interventions to areas not covered by other Community financial instruments.
(6)
The efficiency and transparency of the various procedures for LIFE should be improved by identifying clearly the three component parts which constitute the instrument.
(7)
It is necessary to ensure effective monitoring and evaluation of the actions undertaken under LIFE.
(8)
The experience gained with LIFE during the second phase has highlighted the need to concentrate efforts by specifying more clearly the areas of activity able to benefit from Community financial aid, simplifying the management burden and improving the measures to disseminate information concerning the experience gained, the results achieved and their long-term impact, with a view to promoting the transfer of these results.
(9)
The development of Community environmental policy must take account of the results achieved and the experience gained from the individual actions implemented under LIFE.
(10)
Consideration should be given to migration routes and the role of buffer zones in the context of projects contributing to the implementation of ‘Natura 2000’.
(11)
Preparatory projects should concern the development of new Community environmental actions and instruments, and/or the updating of environmental legislation and policies.
(12)
Decision No 2179/98/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 September 1998 on the review of the European Community programme of policy and action in relation to the environment and sustainable development, ‘Towards sustainability’ (7) sets, among the priority objectives of the Community, the development of programmes for the further promotion of environmental awareness on the part of industry, including, in particular, small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), and giving priority to the problems of SMEs as regards technical and financial obstacles to the development and use of clean technology in relation to the environment.
(13)
The employment implications of proposals considered for financial support under LIFE-environment should be taken into account, where appropriate.
(14)
For third countries bordering on the Mediterranean and the Baltic Sea other than the countries of central and eastern Europe which have concluded Association Agreements with the European Community, technical assistance activities are needed to create capacities and administrative structures in the field of the environment.
(15)
The Europe Agreements between the European Communities and their Member States, of the one part, and the accession candidate central and east European countries, of the other part, provide for the participation of those countries in Community programmes, in particular in the field of the environment.
(16)
While the abovementioned central and east European countries should normally themselves meet the costs arising from their participation, the Community may decide, if necessary, for specific cases and in conformity with the rules applicable to the general budget of the European Union and the relevant Association Agreements, to supplement the national contribution of the country concerned.
(17)
The other accession candidate countries may, where they make a financial contribution to LIFE, participate under conditions equivalent to those laid down for the accession candidate central and east European countries.
(18)
Receipts from third countries constitute resources earmarked for the instrument in question and are entered as such in the corresponding expenditure item.
(19)
Selection mechanisms should be established so that Community assistance may be adapted to the particular features of the projects to be supported; guidelines should promote synergy between demonstration actions and the guiding principles of Community environmental policy with a view to sustainable development.
(20)
The measures necessary for the implementation of this Regulation should be adopted in accordance with Council Decision 1999/468/EC of 28 June 1999 laying down the procedures for the exercise of implementing powers conferred on the Commission (8).
(21)
This Regulation lays down, for the entire duration of the third phase, a financial framework constituting the prime reference, within the meaning of point 33 of the Interinstitutional Agreement of 6 May 1999 between the European Parliament, the Council and the Commission (9), for the budgetary authority during the annual budgetary procedure.
(22)
The European Parliament and the Council should examine the advisability of continuing the LIFE action beyond the third phase, acting on the basis of a proposal from the Commission,
HAVE ADOPTED THIS REGULATION:
