Article 9
Monitoring of projects
1.   For any project financed by LIFE, the beneficiary shall send the Commission and, on request, the Member State concerned technical and financial reports on the progress of work. Reports sent to Member States could be sent in summarised form. A final report shall also be sent to the Commission and the Member State concerned within three months of completion of the project.
The Commission shall determine the form and content of the reports. The report shall be based on the physical and financial indicators set out in the Commission Decision approving the projects or in the contract or agreement concluded with the beneficiaries. These indicators shall be such as to indicate the progress of the work and the objectives to be attained within a specified time limit.
2.   Without prejudice to the audits carried out by the Court of Auditors in liaison with the competent national audit bodies or departments pursuant to Article 248 of the Treaty, or any inspection carried out pursuant to Article 279(c) of the Treaty, officials and other staff of the Commission may carry out on-the-spot checks, including sample checks, on projects financed under LIFE.
Before carrying out an on-the-spot check, the Commission shall inform the beneficiary and its Member State unless there are good reasons to suspect fraud and/or improper use.
3.   For a period of five years following the last payment in respect of any action, the beneficiary of financial assistance shall keep available for the Commission all the supporting documents regarding expenditure on the action.
4.   On the basis of the results of the reports and sample checks referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2, the Commission shall, if necessary, adjust the scale or the conditions of allocation of the financial assistance originally approved and also the timetable for payments.
5.   The Commission shall take every other step necessary to verify that the projects financed are carried out properly and in compliance with the provisions of this Regulation.
