Article 27
Reporting, evaluation and review
1.   Member States shall provide the Commission with all relevant information regarding the implementation and application of this Directive. On the basis of the information provided, the. Commission shall, by 17 December 2023, submit a report to the European Parliament and the Council on the implementation and application of this Directive.
2.   Without prejudice to reporting obligations laid down in other Union legal acts, Member States shall, on an annual basis, submit the following statistics on the reports referred to in Chapter III to the Commission, preferably in an aggregated form, if they are available at a central level in the Member State concerned:
(a)
the number of reports received by the competent authorities;
(b)
the number of investigations and proceedings initiated as a result of such reports and their outcome; and
(c)
if ascertained, the estimated financial damage, and the amounts recovered following investigations and proceedings, related to the breaches reported.
3.   The Commission shall, by 17 December 2025, taking into account its report submitted pursuant to paragraph 1 and the Member States' statistics submitted pursuant to paragraph 2, submit a report to the European Parliament and to the Council assessing the impact of national law transposing this Directive. The report shall evaluate the way in which this Directive has functioned and consider the need for additional measures, including, where appropriate, amendments with a view to extending the scope of this Directive to further Union acts or areas, in particular the improvement of the working environment to protect workers' health and safety and working conditions.
In addition to the evaluation referred to in the first subparagraph, the report shall evaluate how Member States made use of existing cooperation mechanisms as part of their obligations to follow up on reports regarding breaches falling within the scope of this Directive and more generally how they cooperate in cases of breaches with a cross-border dimension.
4.   The Commission shall make the reports referred to in paragraphs 1 and 3 public and easily accessible.
