Article 13
Co-financing rate
1.   The Fund shall finance up to 100 % of the eligible costs of an activity referred to in Article 10(3) of this Regulation without prejudice to Article 190 of the Financial Regulation.
2.   By way of derogation from paragraph 1 of this Article:
(a)
for activities referred to in point (e) of Article 10(3), support from the Fund shall not exceed 20 % of the eligible costs;
(b)
for activities referred to in points (f), (g) and (h) of Article 10(3), support from the Fund shall not exceed 80 % of the eligible costs.
3.   For development actions, the funding rates shall be increased in the following cases:
(a)
an action developed in the context of a project of PESCO, as established by Council Decision (CFSP) 2017/2315 (25), may benefit from a funding rate increased by an additional 10 percentage points;
(b)
an activity may benefit from an increased funding rate, as referred to in this point, where at least 10 % of the total eligible costs of the activity are allocated to SMEs established in Member States or in associated countries and which participate in the activity as recipients, subcontractors or other legal entities in the supply chain.
The funding rate may be increased by percentage points equivalent to the percentage of the total eligible costs of the activity allocated to SMEs established in Member States or in associated countries in which recipients that are not SMEs are established and which participate in the activity as recipients, subcontractors or other legal entities in the supply chain, up to an additional 5 percentage points.
The funding rate may be increased by percentage points equivalent to twice the percentage of the total eligible costs of the activity allocated to SMEs established in Member States or in associated countries other than those in which recipients that are not SMEs are established and which participate in the activity as recipients, subcontractors or other legal entities in the supply chain;
(c)
an activity may benefit from a funding rate increased by an additional 10 percentage points where at least 15 % of the total eligible costs of the activity are allocated to mid-caps established in Member States or in associated countries.
The overall increase in the funding rate of an activity following the application of points (a), (b) and (c) shall not exceed 35 percentage points.
Support from the Fund, including increased funding rates, shall not cover more than 100 % of the eligible costs of the action.
