Article 29
Evaluation of the Fund
1.   Evaluations of the Fund shall be carried out to feed into the decision-making process in a timely manner.
2.   The interim evaluation of the Fund shall be carried out once there is sufficient information available about its implementation, but no later than four years after the start of the implementation period of the Fund.
The interim evaluation report covering the period until 31 July 2024, shall include in particular:
(a)
an assessment of the governance of the Fund, including as regards:
(i)
the provisions related to independent experts;
(ii)
the implementation of the ethics procedures set out to in Article 7 of this Regulation;
(b)
the lessons learned from the EDIDP and the PADR;
(c)
the implementation rates;
(d)
the project award results, including the level of involvement of SMEs and mid-caps and the degree of their cross-border participation;
(e)
the rates of reimbursement of indirect costs as set out in Article 15 of this Regulation;
(f)
the amounts allocated to disruptive technologies for defence in calls for proposals; and
(g)
funding granted in accordance with Article 195 of the Financial Regulation.
The interim evaluation shall also contain information on the countries of origin of the recipients, the number of countries involved in individual projects and, where possible, the distribution of the generated IPRs. The Commission may submit proposals for any appropriate amendments to this Regulation.
3.   At the end of the implementation period but no later than 31 December 2031, the Commission shall carry out a final evaluation and prepare a report on the implementation of the Fund.
The final evaluation report shall:
(a)
include the results of the implementation and, to the extent possible, the impact of the Fund;
(b)
build on relevant consultations of Member States and associated countries and key stakeholders and shall in particular assess progress made towards the achievement of the objectives set out in Article 3;
(c)
help to identify where the Union is dependent on third countries for the development of defence products and technologies;
(d)
analyse cross-border participation, including of SMEs and mid-caps, in actions carried out under the Fund as well as the integration of SMEs and mid-caps in the global value chain and the contribution of the Fund to addressing the shortfalls identified in the CDP; and
(e)
contain information on the countries of origin of the recipients and, where possible, the distribution of the generated IPRs.
4.   The Commission shall communicate the conclusions of the evaluations, accompanied by its observations, to the European Parliament, to the Council, to the European Economic and Social Committee and to the Committee of the Regions.
