Whereas:
(1)
Since the adoption of Regulation (EU) 2015/760 of the European Parliament and of the Council (3) only a few European long-term investment funds (ELTIFs) have been authorised. The aggregate size of net assets of those funds was estimated at approximately EUR 2 400 000 000 in 2021.
(2)
The available market data indicate that the development of the ELTIF segment has not scaled up as expected, despite the Union’s focus on promoting long-term finance in the Union.
(3)
Certain characteristics of the ELTIF market, including the low number of funds, the small net asset size, the low number of jurisdictions in which ELTIFs are domiciled and a portfolio composition that is skewed towards certain eligible investment categories, demonstrate the concentrated nature of that market, both geographically and in terms of investment type. Moreover, there appears to be a lack of awareness and financial literacy, as well as, most importantly, low levels of trust and reliability as regards the finance industry, that need to be overcome in order to make ELTIFs more accessible and popular among retail investors. It is therefore necessary to review the functioning of the legal framework for the operation of ELTIFs in order to ensure that more investments are channelled to businesses in need of capital and to long-term investment projects.
(4)
At present, the objective of Regulation (EU) 2015/760 is to channel capital towards European long-term investments in the Union’s real economy. As a result, it can occur that a majority of ELTIF assets and investments, or the main revenue or profit generation of such assets and investments, is located within the Union. However, long-term investments in projects, undertakings, and infrastructure projects in third countries can also bring capital to ELTIFs and benefit the Union’s economy. Such benefits can originate in multiple ways, including through investments that promote the development of border regions, that enhance commercial, financial and technological cooperation and that facilitate investments in environmental and sustainable energy projects. Indeed, certain long-term assets and investments that benefit the Union’s real economy will unavoidably be located in third countries, such as subsea fibre optic cables that connect Europe with other continents, the construction of liquefied natural gas terminals and related infrastructure, or cross-border investments in renewable energy installations and facilities that contribute to the resilience of the electrical grid and the energy security of the Union. Since investments in third-country qualifying portfolio undertakings and eligible assets can bring benefits to investors and managers of ELTIFs, as well as to the economies, infrastructure, climate and environmental sustainability and citizens of such third countries, Regulation (EU) 2015/760 should not prevent a majority of ELTIF assets and investments, or the main revenue or profit generation of such assets and investments, from being located in a third country.
(5)
Accordingly, and also having regard to ELTIFs’ potential to facilitate long-term investments in, amongst others, energy, transport and social infrastructure, and job creation, and to contribute to the achievement of the European Green Deal, Regulation (EU) 2015/760 should be amended so that its objective is to facilitate the raising and channelling of capital towards long-term investments in the real economy, including towards investments that promote the European Green Deal and other priority areas, and to ensure that capital flows are directed towards projects that put the Union’s economy on a path towards smart, sustainable and inclusive growth.
(6)
It is necessary to enhance the flexibility of asset managers to invest in broad categories of real assets. Real assets should therefore be deemed to form a category of eligible assets, provided that those real assets have value due to their nature or substance. Such real assets include immovable property, such as communication, environment, energy or transport infrastructure, social infrastructure, including retirement homes or hospitals, as well as infrastructure for education, health and welfare support or industrial facilities, installations, and other assets, including intellectual property, vessels, equipment, machinery, aircraft or rolling stock.
(7)
Investments in commercial property, facilities or installations for education, counselling, research, development, including infrastructure and other assets that give rise to economic or social benefit, sports, or housing, including housing for senior residents or social housing, should also be deemed to be eligible investments in real assets due to the capacity of such assets to contribute to the objective of smart, sustainable and inclusive growth. To enable the realisation of investment strategies in areas where direct investments in real assets are not possible or are uneconomical, eligible investments in real assets should also comprise investments in water rights, forest rights, building rights and mineral rights.
(8)
Eligible investment assets should be understood to exclude works of art, manuscripts, wine stocks, jewellery or other assets, which do not in themselves represent long-term investments in the real economy.
(9)
It is necessary to increase the attractiveness of ELTIFs for asset managers and broaden the range of investment strategies available to managers of ELTIFs so as to avoid any undue limitation of the scope of the eligibility of assets and investment activities of ELTIFs. The eligibility of real assets should not depend on their nature and objectives, or upon environmental, social or governance matters and related sustainability disclosures and similar conditions, which are already covered by Regulations (EU) 2019/2088 (4) and (EU) 2020/852 (5) of the European Parliament and of the Council. Nevertheless, ELTIFs remain subject to the obligations stemming from Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 on sustainability-related disclosures. In particular, when ELTIFs either promote environmental or social characteristics or have sustainable investment as their objective, they are to comply with the disclosure requirements set out in Article 8 or 9 of Regulation (EU) 2019/2088, as applicable, which each contain detailed transparency requirements for pre-contractual disclosures.
(10)
In order to encourage private capital flows towards more environmentally sustainable investments, it should be clarified that ELTIFs are also able to invest in green bonds. At the same time, it should also be ensured that ELTIFs target long-term investments and that the requirements of Regulation (EU) 2015/760 regarding eligible investment assets are observed. Therefore, green bonds that comply with those eligibility requirements and that are issued pursuant to a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on European green bonds should be expressly included in the list of eligible investment assets.
(11)
In order to improve access of investors to more up-to-date and complete information on the ELTIF market, it is necessary to increase the granularity and the timeliness of the central public register provided for in Regulation (EU) 2015/760. That register should therefore contain additional information to the information that it already contains including, and where available, the Legal Entity Identifier (LEI) and the national code identifier of the ELTIF, the name, address and the LEI of the manager of the ELTIF, the International Securities Identification Number (ISIN code) of the ELTIF and of each separate unit or share class, the competent authority of the ELTIF and the home Member State of that ELTIF, the Member States where the ELTIF is marketed, whether the ELTIF can be marketed to retail investors or solely to professional investors, the date of authorisation of the ELTIF, and the date on which the marketing of the ELTIF commenced.
(12)
Investments by ELTIFs can be conducted through the participation of intermediary entities, including special purpose vehicles and securitisation or aggregator vehicles or holding companies. At present, Regulation (EU) 2015/760 requires that investments in equity or quasi-equity instruments of qualifying portfolio undertakings only take place where those undertakings are majority-owned subsidiaries, which substantially limits the scope of the eligible asset base. ELTIFs should therefore, in general, have the possibility of conducting minority co-investment in investment opportunities. That possibility should give ELTIFs additional flexibility in implementing their investment strategies, attract more promotors of investment projects and increase the range of possible eligible target assets, all of which are essential for the implementation of indirect investment strategies.
(13)
Due to concerns that fund-of-funds strategies can give rise to investments that would not fall within the scope of eligible investment assets, Regulation (EU) 2015/760 at present contains restrictions on investments in other funds throughout the life of an ELTIF. Fund-of-funds strategies are, however, a common and very effective way of obtaining rapid exposure to illiquid assets, in particular in respect of real estate and in the context of fully paid-in capital structures. It is therefore necessary to give ELTIFs the possibility of investing in other funds, to enable them to ensure a faster deployment of capital. Facilitating fund-of-funds investments by ELTIFs would also allow reinvestment of excess cash into funds, as different investments with distinct maturities might lower the cash drag of an ELTIF. It is therefore necessary to expand the eligibility of fund-of-funds strategies for managers of ELTIFs beyond investments in European venture capital funds (EuVECAs) or European social entrepreneurship funds (EuSEFs). The categories of collective investment undertakings in which ELTIFs can invest should thus be broadened to include undertakings for collective investment in transferable securities (UCITS) and also EU alternative investment funds (EU AIFs) managed by EU AIF managers (EU AIFMs). However, in order to ensure effective investor protection, it is also necessary to provide that where an ELTIF invests in other ELTIFs, in EuVECAs, in EuSEFs, in UCITS or EU AIFs managed by EU AIFMs, those collective investment undertakings should also invest in eligible investments and have not themselves invested more than 10 % of their capital in any other collective investment undertaking. In order to prevent circumvention of those rules and to ensure that ELTIFs comply on an aggregate portfolio basis with Regulation (EU) 2015/760, the assets and cash borrowing position of ELTIFs should be combined with those of the collective investment undertakings in which ELTIFs have invested in order to assess ELTIFs’ compliance with the portfolio composition and diversification requirements, and with the borrowing limits.
(14)
At present, Regulation (EU) 2015/760 requires that eligible investment assets, where those assets are individual real assets, have a value of at least EUR 10 000 000. Real asset portfolios, however, are often composed of a number of individual real assets which have a value of significantly less than EUR 10 000 000. The requirement for a minimum value of individual real assets should therefore be removed. It is expected that the removal of that unnecessary requirement will contribute to the diversification of investment portfolios and boost more effective investments in real assets by ELTIFs, while also allowing for different levels of development of long-term investment instruments in the Member States to be taken into consideration.
(15)
It is necessary to extend the scope of eligible investment assets and promote the investments of ELTIFs in securitised assets. It should therefore be clarified that, where the underlying assets consist of long-term exposures, eligible investment assets should also include simple, transparent and standardised securitisations as referred to in Article 18 of Regulation (EU) 2017/2402 of the European Parliament and of the Council (6). Those long-term exposures comprise securitisations of residential loans that are secured by one or more mortgages on residential immovable property (residential mortgage-backed securities), commercial loans that are secured by one or more mortgages on commercial immovable property, corporate loans, including loans which are granted to small- and medium-sized enterprises, and trade receivables or other underlying exposures that the originator considers form a distinct asset type, provided that the proceeds from securitising those trade receivables or other underlying exposures are used for financing or refinancing long-term investments.
(16)
At present, Regulation (EU) 2015/760 prevents investments by ELTIFs in credit institutions, investment firms, insurance undertakings and other financial undertakings. However, innovative recently authorised financial undertakings such as FinTechs could play an important role in promoting digital innovation, the overall efficiency of Union financial markets and job creation, and in contributing to the resilience and stability of Union financial infrastructure and the capital markets union. Such financial undertakings design, develop or offer innovative products or technologies that aim to automate or improve existing business models, processes, applications and products, or result in new ones, and thereby benefit Union financial markets, financial institutions and the provision of financial services to financial institutions, businesses or consumers. Such financial undertakings also render specific regulatory, supervisory or oversight processes more efficient and effective, or modernise regulatory, supervisory or oversight compliance functions across financial or non-financial institutions. It is therefore desirable to amend Regulation (EU) 2015/760 in order to permit ELTIFs to invest in innovative recently authorised financial undertakings. As the area is dynamic and rapidly evolving, ELTIFs should be allowed to invest in financial undertakings, other than financial holding companies or mixed-activity holding companies, that are regulated entities authorised or registered more recently than five years before the date of the initial investment.
(17)
At present, Regulation (EU) 2015/760 requires that qualifying portfolio undertakings, where those qualifying undertakings are admitted to trading on a regulated market or on a multilateral trading facility, have a market capitalisation of no more than EUR 500 000 000. However, many listed companies with a low market capitalisation have a limited liquidity which prevents managers of ELTIFs from building, within a reasonable time, a sufficient position in such listed companies, and as a result narrows the range of available investment targets. In order to provide ELTIFs with a better liquidity profile, the market capitalisation of the listed qualifying portfolio undertakings in which ELTIFs can invest should therefore be increased from a maximum of EUR 500 000 000 to a maximum of EUR 1 500 000 000. To avoid potential changes to the eligibility of such investments due to currency fluctuations or other factors, the determination of the market capitalisation threshold should be made only at the time of the initial investment.
(18)
In order to ensure the transparency and integrity of investments in assets located in third countries for investors, managers of ELTIFs and competent authorities, the requirements in respect of investments in third-country qualifying portfolio undertakings should be aligned to the standards laid down in Directive (EU) 2015/849 of the European Parliament and of the Council (7). They should also be aligned to the standards set out in the common action undertaken by the Member States as regards non-cooperative jurisdictions for tax purposes, reflected in the Council conclusions on the revised EU list of non-cooperative jurisdictions for tax purposes.
(19)
Managers of ELTIFs that hold a stake in a portfolio undertaking might place their own interests ahead of those of investors in the ELTIF. To avoid such conflicts of interest, and to ensure sound corporate governance, Regulation (EU) 2015/760 requires that an ELTIF only invests in assets that are unrelated to the manager of the ELTIF, unless the ELTIF invests in units or shares of other collective investment undertakings that are managed by the manager of the ELTIF. It is, however, established market practice that one or several investment vehicles of the asset manager co-invest alongside another fund that has a similar objective and strategy as that of the ELTIF. Such co-investments by the EU AIFM and other affiliate entities that belong to the same group allow for the attraction of larger pools of capital for investments in large-scale projects. For that purpose, asset managers typically invest in parallel with the ELTIF in a target entity and structure their investments through co-investment vehicles. As part of the asset management mandate, portfolio managers and senior staff of the asset managers are typically required or expected to co-invest in the same fund that they manage. It is therefore appropriate to specify that the provisions on conflicts of interest should not prevent a manager of an ELTIF or an undertaking that belongs to the same group from co-investing in that ELTIF or from co-investing with that ELTIF in the same asset. In order to ensure that effective investor protection safeguards are in place, where such co-investments take place, managers of ELTIFs should put in place organisational and administrative arrangements in accordance with the requirements laid down in Directive 2011/61/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council (8) designed to identify, prevent, manage and monitor conflicts of interest and ensure that such conflicts of interest are adequately disclosed.
(20)
To prevent conflicts of interest, avoid transactions that do not take place on commercial terms and ensure sound corporate governance, Regulation (EU) 2015/760 does not allow the staff of the manager of an ELTIF and of undertakings that belong to the same group as the manager of the ELTIF to invest in that ELTIF or to co-invest with the ELTIF in the same asset. It is, however, established market practice that the staff of the manager of an ELTIF and of other affiliate entities that belong to the same group, which co-invest alongside the manager of the ELTIF, including the portfolio managers and senior staff responsible for the key financial and operational decisions of the manager of the ELTIF, are often required or expected due to the nature of the asset management mandate to co-invest in the same fund or the same asset in order to promote the alignment of financial incentives of those staff and the investors. It is therefore appropriate to specify that the provisions on conflicts of interest should not prevent the staff of the manager of an ELTIF or of undertakings that belong to that group from co-investing in their personal capacity in that ELTIF and from co-investing with the ELTIF in the same asset. In order to ensure that effective investor protection safeguards are in place, where such co-investments by the staff take place, managers of ELTIFs should put in place organisational and administrative arrangements designed to identify, prevent, manage and monitor conflicts of interest and ensure that such conflicts of interest are adequately disclosed.
(21)
The rules for ELTIFs are almost identical for both professional and retail investors, including rules on the use of leverage, on the diversification of assets and composition of the portfolios, on concentration limits and on limits on the eligible assets and investments. However, professional and retail investors have different time horizons, risk tolerances and investment needs as well as different capabilities to analyse investment opportunities. Indeed, professional investors have a higher risk tolerance than retail investors, are able to perform thorough analyses of investment possibilities and due diligence of assets and their valuation, and might, due to their nature and activities, have different return objectives compared to retail investors. Despite that, and because of the almost identical rules and the resulting high administrative burden and associated costs for ELTIFs intended for professional investors, asset managers have to date been reluctant to offer tailored products to professional investors. It is therefore appropriate to provide for specific rules for ELTIFs that are marketed solely to professional investors, in particular with regard to the diversification and composition of the portfolio concerned, the concentration limits and the borrowing of cash.
(22)
At present, Regulation (EU) 2015/760 requires that ELTIFs invest at least 70 % of their capital in eligible investment assets. That high investment limit for eligible investment assets in ELTIFs’ portfolios was initially established in view of the focus of ELTIFs on long-term investments and the contribution such investments were expected to make to the financing of sustainable growth of the Union’s economy. Given the illiquid and idiosyncratic nature of certain eligible investment assets within ELTIFs’ portfolios, however, it can prove difficult and costly for managers of ELTIFs to manage the liquidity of ELTIFs, honour redemption requests, enter into borrowing arrangements, and execute other elements of ELTIFs’ investment strategies pertaining to the transfer, valuation and pledging of such eligible investment assets. Lowering the limit for eligible investment assets would therefore enable managers of ELTIFs to better manage the liquidity of ELTIFs. Only eligible investment assets of ELTIFs other than collective investment undertakings and eligible investment assets of collective investment undertakings in which ELTIFs have invested should be combined for the purpose of assessing compliance by those ELTIFs with the investment limit for eligible investment assets.
(23)
The existing diversification requirements of Regulation (EU) 2015/760 were introduced in order to ensure that ELTIFs can withstand adverse market circumstances. However, those provisions have proven to be too burdensome because in practice they mean that ELTIFs are, on average, required to make 10 distinct investments. In relation to investment in projects or large-scale infrastructure, the requirement to make 10 investments per ELTIF can be difficult to achieve, and costly in terms of transactional costs and capital allocation. To reduce transaction and administrative costs for ELTIFs, and ultimately their investors, ELTIFs should therefore be able to pursue more concentrated investment strategies and thus have exposures to fewer eligible assets. It is therefore necessary to adjust the diversification requirements for ELTIFs’ exposures to single qualifying portfolio undertakings, single real assets, collective investment undertakings and certain other eligible investment assets, contracts and financial instruments. That additional flexibility in the portfolio composition of ELTIFs and the reduction in the diversification requirements should not materially affect the capacity of ELTIFs to withstand market volatility, since ELTIFs typically invest in assets that do not have a readily available market quotation, that might be highly illiquid, and that frequently have long-term maturity or a longer time horizon.
(24)
Unlike retail investors, professional investors have, in certain circumstances, a longer time horizon, distinct financial returns objectives, more expertise, higher risk tolerance to adverse market conditions and higher capacity to absorb losses. It is therefore necessary to establish for such professional investors a differentiated set of investor protection measures and to remove the diversification requirements for ELTIFs that are marketed solely to professional investors.
(25)
In order to better use the expertise of managers of ELTIFs and because of the benefits of diversification, in certain cases it can be beneficial for ELTIFs to invest all or almost all of their assets in the diversified portfolio of a master ELTIF. ELTIFs should therefore be allowed to pool their assets and make use of master-feeder structures by investing in master ELTIFs.
(26)
Leverage is frequently used to enable the day-to-day operation of an ELTIF and to carry out a specific investment strategy. Moderate amounts of leverage can, where adequately controlled, amplify returns without incurring or exacerbating excessive risks. In addition, leverage can frequently be used by a variety of collective investment undertakings to gain additional efficiencies or operational results. Since the borrowing of cash is at present limited in Regulation (EU) 2015/760 to 30 % of the value of the capital of ELTIFs, managers of ELTIFs might be unable to successfully pursue certain investment strategies, including in the case of investments in real assets, where using higher levels of leverage is an industry norm or is otherwise required to achieve attractive risk-adjusted returns. It is therefore appropriate to increase the flexibility of managers of ELTIFs to raise further capital during the life of an ELTIF. At the same time, it is desirable to enhance the management of leverage and to promote a greater consistency with Directive 2011/61/EU with respect to borrowing policy by replacing capital with net asset value as the appropriate point of reference for determining the borrowing of cash limit, which should be accompanied by improvements to the rectification policy. In view of the possible risks that leverage can entail, ELTIFs that can be marketed to retail investors should be permitted to borrow cash amounting to no more than 50 % of the net asset value of the ELTIF. The 50 % limit is appropriate given the overall borrowing of cash limits common for funds investing in real assets with a similar liquidity and redemption profile.
For ELTIFs marketed to professional investors, however, a higher leverage limit should be permitted, because professional investors have a higher risk tolerance than retail investors. The borrowing of cash limit for ELTIFs that are marketed solely to professional investors should therefore be extended to no more than 100 % of the ELTIF’s net asset value. Moreover, to date, Regulation (EU) 2015/760 does not offer the manager of an ELTIF the possibility of rectifying the investment position, within an appropriate period of time, in cases where the ELTIF infringes the leverage limit and the infringement is beyond the control of the manager of the ELTIF. Taking into account the volatility of the net asset value as a reference value and the interests of the investors in the ELTIF, it should therefore be specified that the provisions on rectification in Regulation (EU) 2015/760 apply also to borrowing limits.
(27)
To provide ELTIFs with wider investment opportunities, ELTIFs should be able to borrow in the currency in which the manager of the ELTIF expects to acquire the asset. It is, however, necessary to mitigate the risk of currency mismatches and thus to limit the currency risk for the investment portfolio. ELTIFs should therefore appropriately hedge their currency exposure.
(28)
ELTIFs should be able to encumber their assets to implement their borrowing strategy. In order to further increase the flexibility of ELTIFs in executing their borrowing strategy, borrowing arrangements should not constitute borrowing where that borrowing is fully covered by investors’ capital commitments.
(29)
Given the increase of the maximum limits for the borrowing of cash by ELTIFs and the removal of certain limits on the borrowing of cash in foreign currencies, investors should have more comprehensive information on the borrowing strategies and limits employed by ELTIFs. It is therefore appropriate to require managers of ELTIFs to expressly disclose the borrowing limits in the prospectus of the ELTIF concerned.
(30)
At present, Regulation (EU) 2015/760 provides that investors in an ELTIF are able to request the winding down of that ELTIF where their redemption requests, made in accordance with the ELTIF’s redemption policy, have not been satisfied within one year from the date on which those requests were made. Given the long-term orientation of ELTIFs and the often idiosyncratic and illiquid asset profile of ELTIFs’ portfolios, the entitlement of any investor or group of investors to request the winding down of an ELTIF can be disproportionate and detrimental to both the successful execution of the ELTIF’s investment strategy and the interests of other investors or groups of investors. It is therefore appropriate to remove the possibility for investors to require the winding down of an ELTIF where that ELTIF is unable to satisfy redemption requests.
(31)
At present, Regulation (EU) 2015/760 is unclear about the criteria to assess the redemption percentage in any given period of time, and about the minimum information to be provided to competent authorities about the possibility of redemptions. Given the central role of the European Supervisory Authority (European Securities and Markets Authority) (ESMA) in the application of Regulation (EU) 2015/760 and its expertise in relation to securities and securities markets, it is appropriate to entrust ESMA with the drawing up of draft regulatory technical standards specifying the circumstances in which the life of an ELTIF is considered compatible with the life-cycles of each of the individual assets of the ELTIF; the criteria to determine the minimum holding period; the minimum information to be provided to the competent authority of the ELTIF; the requirements to be fulfilled by the ELTIF in relation to its redemption policy and liquidity management tools; and the criteria to assess the redemption percentage. It should be noted that where the rules or instruments of incorporation of an ELTIF provide for the possibility of redemptions during the life of that ELTIF, the provisions on liquidity risk management and liquidity management tools set out in Directive 2011/61/EU apply.
(32)
At present, Regulation (EU) 2015/760 requires that the rules or instruments of incorporation of an ELTIF do not prevent units or shares of the ELTIF from being admitted to trading on a regulated market or on a multilateral trading facility. Despite that possibility, managers of ELTIFs, as well as investors and market participants, have hardly used the secondary trading mechanism for the trading of units or shares of ELTIFs. To promote the secondary trading of ELTIF units or shares, it is appropriate to allow managers of ELTIFs to provide for the possibility of an early exit of ELTIF investors during the life of the ELTIF. In order to ensure the effective functioning of such a secondary trading mechanism, an early exit should be possible only where the manager of the ELTIF has put in place a policy for matching potential investors and exit requests. That policy should, amongst others, specify the transfer process, the role of the manager of the ELTIF or the fund administrator, the periodicity and duration of the liquidity window during which the units or shares of the ELTIF can be exchanged, the rules determining the execution price and pro-ration conditions, the disclosure requirements, and the fees, costs and charges and other conditions related to such a liquidity window mechanism. ESMA should be entrusted with the drawing up of draft regulatory technical standards specifying the circumstances for the use of matching, including the information that ELTIFs are required to disclose to investors.
(33)
In order to avoid any misunderstanding by retail investors regarding the legal nature of, and the potential liquidity allowed for by, the secondary trading mechanism, the distributor or, when directly offering or placing units or shares of an ELTIF to a retail investor, the manager of the ELTIF should issue a clear written alert to retail investors that the availability of a matching mechanism does not guarantee the matching or entitle retail investors to exiting or redeeming their units or shares of the ELTIF concerned. That written alert should be part of a single written alert that also informs retail investors that the ELTIF product might not be fit for retail investors that are unable to sustain such a long-term and illiquid commitment, where the life of an ELTIF offered or placed to retail investors exceeds 10 years. When presented in marketing communication to retail investors, the availability of a matching mechanism should not be promoted as a tool that guarantees liquidity upon request.
(34)
At present, Regulation (EU) 2015/760 requires ELTIFs to adopt an itemised schedule for the orderly disposal of their assets to redeem investors’ units or shares after the end of the life of the ELTIF. That Regulation also requires ELTIFs to disclose that itemised schedule to the competent authority of the ELTIF. Those requirements subject managers of ELTIFs to substantial administrative and compliance burdens, without bringing a corresponding increase in investor protection. In order to alleviate those burdens without diminishing investor protection, ELTIFs should inform the competent authority of the ELTIF about the orderly disposal of their assets in order to redeem investors’ units or shares after the end of the life of the ELTIF, and only provide the competent authority of the ELTIF with an itemised schedule where they are expressly asked to do so by that competent authority.
(35)
The prospectus of a feeder ELTIF can contain highly relevant information for investors, which enables them to better assess the potential risks and benefits of an investment. It is therefore appropriate to require that, in the case of a master-feeder structure, the prospectus of the feeder ELTIF should contain disclosures on the master-feeder structure, the feeder ELTIF and the master ELTIF, and a description of all remuneration or reimbursement of costs payable by the feeder ELTIF.
(36)
Adequate disclosure of fees and charges is critically important for the evaluation of an ELTIF as a potential investment target by investors. Such disclosure is also important where the ELTIF is marketed to retail investors in the case of master-feeder structures. It is therefore appropriate to require the manager of an ELTIF to include in the annual report of the feeder ELTIF a statement on the aggregate charges of the feeder ELTIF and the master ELTIF. Such requirement is expected to contribute to the protection of investors against being charged unjustified additional costs as a result of subscription and redemption fees potentially charged by the master ELTIF to the feeder ELTIF.
(37)
Regulation (EU) 2015/760 requires the manager of an ELTIF to disclose in the ELTIF prospectus information about fees related to investing in that ELTIF. Regulation (EU) No 1286/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council (9), however, also contains requirements concerning the disclosure of fees. In order to increase transparency on fee structures, the requirement laid down in Regulation (EU) 2015/760 should be aligned with the requirement laid down in Regulation (EU) No 1286/2014.
(38)
At present, Regulation (EU) 2015/760 requires managers of ELTIFs to set up local facilities in each Member State where they intend to market ELTIFs. While the requirements to perform certain tasks for investors across all Member States remain in place, the requirement to set up local facilities has, however, subsequently been removed by Directive (EU) 2019/1160 of the European Parliament and of the Council (10) as regards UCITS and alternative investment funds marketed to retail investors, since such local facilities create additional costs and friction in respect of the cross-border marketing of ELTIFs. In addition, the preferred method of contact with investors has shifted from physical meetings at local facilities to direct interaction between fund managers or distributors and investors by electronic means. Removing that requirement from Regulation (EU) 2015/760 for all ELTIF investors would hence be consistent with Directive (EU) 2019/1160 and the contemporary methods of marketing of financial products, and could promote the attractiveness of ELTIFs for asset managers, who would no longer be required to incur costs stemming from the operation of local facilities. That requirement should therefore be removed.
(39)
Since units and shares of ELTIFs are financial instruments, the product governance rules of Directive 2014/65/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council (11) apply where ELTIFs are marketed with the provision of investment services. However, an ELTIF’s units or shares can also be purchased without the provision of investment services. To cover those cases, Regulation (EU) 2015/760 at present requires managers of ELTIFs to develop an internal assessment process for ELTIFs marketed to retail investors. The current regime is inspired by the product governance rules of Directive 2014/65/EU but contains several differences that are not justified and could reduce investor protection. It should therefore be specified that the product governance rules laid down in Directive 2014/65/EU apply. The references to Directive 2014/65/EU are to be understood as entailing the application of the delegated acts supplementing that Directive.
(40)
At present, Regulation (EU) 2015/760 requires distributors or managers of ELTIFs to carry out a suitability assessment in respect of retail investors. However, that requirement is already provided for in Article 25 of Directive 2014/65/EU. Having a duplicate requirement creates an additional layer of administrative burden leading to higher costs for retail investors and is a strong disincentive for managers of ELTIFs to offer new ELTIFs to retail investors. It is therefore necessary to remove that duplicate requirement from Regulation (EU) 2015/760.
(41)
In order to ensure a high level of protection of retail investors, a suitability assessment should be carried out irrespective of whether the units or shares of ELTIFs are acquired by retail investors from distributors or managers of ELTIFs or via the secondary market. In accordance with Article 25(2) of Directive 2014/65/EU, the suitability assessment should comprise information on the expected duration and purpose of the investment and the retail investor’s risk tolerance, as part of the information on the retail investor’s investment objectives and financial situation, including their ability to bear losses. The results of the assessment should be communicated to the retail investors in the form of a statement on suitability, in accordance with Article 25(6) of Directive 2014/65/EU.
(42)
In addition, in cases where the result of the suitability assessment is that an ELTIF is not suitable for a retail investor and such investor nevertheless wishes to proceed with the transaction, the express consent of that retail investor should be obtained before the distributor or manager of the ELTIF proceeds with the transaction.
(43)
Regulation (EU) 2015/760 also requires distributors or managers of ELTIFs to provide appropriate investment advice when marketing ELTIFs to retail investors. The lack of precision in Regulation (EU) 2015/760 as to what constitutes appropriate investment advice and the lack of a cross-reference to the definition of investment advice in Directive 2014/65/EU have led to a lack of legal certainty and confusion among distributors and managers of ELTIFs. In addition, the obligation to provide investment advice requires external distributors to be authorised under Directive 2014/65/EU when marketing ELTIFs to retail investors. That creates unnecessary impediments to the marketing of ELTIFs to such investors and also subjects ELTIFs to stricter requirements than those for the distribution of other complex financial products, including the requirements for securitisations laid down in Regulation (EU) 2017/2402 and for subordinated eligible liabilities laid down in Directive 2014/59/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council (12). It is therefore not necessary to require distributors and managers of ELTIFs to provide retail investors with such investment advice. Moreover, given the importance of having a level playing field among financial products when such products are marketed to end investors, and of ensuring that this Regulation contains, amongst others, effective investor protection safeguards, ELTIFs should not be subject to unnecessary administrative and regulatory burden.
(44)
To ensure effective supervision of the application of the requirements related to the marketing of ELTIFs to retail investors, the distributor or, when directly offering or placing units or shares of an ELTIF to a retail investor, the manager of the ELTIF should be subject to the record-keeping rules of Directive 2014/65/EU.
(45)
In the event that the marketing or placing of ELTIFs to retail investors is done through a distributor, such distributor should comply with the applicable requirements of Directive 2014/65/EU and Regulation (EU) No 600/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council (13). In order to ensure legal certainty and avoid duplication, where a retail investor has been provided with investment advice under Directive 2014/65/EU, the requirement to provide a suitability assessment should be considered to be fulfilled.
(46)
It is established market practice that the portfolio managers and senior staff of the manager of an ELTIF are required or expected to invest in ELTIFs managed by that same manager of the ELTIF. Such persons are presumed to be financially sophisticated and well-informed about the ELTIF, meaning that it would be superfluous to require them to undergo a suitability assessment for investments in the ELTIF. It is therefore appropriate not to require distributors or managers of ELTIFs to carry out a suitability assessment for such individuals.
(47)
At present, for potential retail investors whose financial instrument portfolio does not exceed EUR 500 000, Regulation (EU) 2015/760 requires an initial minimum investment in one or more ELTIFs of EUR 10 000 and requires that such investors do not invest an aggregate amount exceeding 10 % of their financial instrument portfolio in ELTIFs. When applied together, the EUR 10 000 initial minimum investment and the 10 % limit on aggregate investment create a significant obstacle to investments in ELTIFs for retail investors, which conflicts with the goal of ELTIFs to establish a retail alternative investment fund product. It is therefore necessary to remove the EUR 10 000 initial minimum investment requirement and the 10 % limit on aggregate investment.
(48)
At present, Regulation (EU) 2015/760 requires investors to be treated equally and prohibits preferential treatment of individual investors or groups of investors, or the granting of specific economic benefits to those investors. ELTIFs can, however, have several classes of units or shares with slightly or substantially distinct conditions as regards the fees, legal structure, marketing rules and other requirements. In order to take those differences into account, those requirements should only apply to individual investors or groups of investors that invest in the same class or classes of ELTIFs.
(49)
In order to give managers of ELTIFs sufficient time to adapt to the requirements of this Regulation, including the requirements pertaining to the marketing of ELTIFs to investors, this Regulation should start to apply nine months after its entry into force.
(50)
Due to the potentially illiquid nature of eligible assets and the long-term orientation of ELTIFs, ELTIFs can experience difficulties in complying with any changes to the fund rules and regulatory requirements introduced during their life-cycle, without affecting the trust and confidence of their investors. It is therefore necessary to provide for transitional rules in respect of those ELTIFs that were authorised before the entry into application of this Regulation. However, such ELTIFs should also be able to choose to be subject to this Regulation provided that the competent authority of the ELTIF is notified accordingly.
(51)
Since the objectives of this Regulation, namely, to ensure an effective legal framework for the operation of ELTIFs throughout the Union and to promote long-term finance by raising and channelling capital towards long-term investments in the real economy in line with the Union objective of smart, sustainable and inclusive growth, cannot be sufficiently achieved by the Member States but can rather, by reason of the scale and effects of this Regulation, be better achieved at Union level, the Union may adopt measures, in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity as set out in Article 5 of the Treaty on European Union. In accordance with the principle of proportionality as set out in that Article, this Regulation does not go beyond what is necessary in order to achieve those objectives.
(52)
Regulation (EU) 2015/760 should therefore be amended accordingly,
HAVE ADOPTED THIS REGULATION:
