Article 13
Obligations in relation to exports of chemicals other than export notification requirements
1.   The Commission shall immediately forward to the Member States and European industry associations information which it receives, whether in the form of circulars or otherwise, from the Secretariat regarding chemicals subject to the PIC procedure and the decisions of importing Parties regarding import conditions applicable to those chemicals. It shall also immediately forward to the Member States information concerning any cases of failure to transmit a response in accordance with Article 10(2) of the Convention. The Commission shall keep all information regarding import decisions, which shall each be assigned an import decision reference identification number, available in its database, which shall be publicly available on the Internet, and provide anyone with that information upon request.
2.   The Commission shall assign each chemical listed in Annex I a classification in the European Community's Combined Nomenclature. Those classifications shall be revised as necessary in the light of any changes made in the World Customs Organization's Harmonized System Nomenclature or in the European Community's Combined Nomenclature for the chemicals concerned.
3.   Each Member State shall communicate the responses forwarded by the Commission under paragraph 1 to those concerned within its jurisdiction.
4.   Exporters shall comply with decisions in each import response no later than six months after the Secretariat has first informed the Commission of that response under paragraph 1.
5.   The Commission and the Member States shall advise and assist importing Parties, upon request and as appropriate, to obtain further information to help them to make a response to the Secretariat concerning import of a given chemical.
6.   Substances listed in Parts 2 or 3 of Annex I or preparations containing such substances in a concentration that could trigger labelling obligations under Directive 1999/45/EC irrespective of the presence of any other substances shall not be exported unless either of the following conditions is fulfilled:
(a)
explicit consent to import has been sought and received by the exporter through his designated national authority in consultation with the Commission and the designated national authority of the importing Party or an appropriate authority in an importing other country;
(b)
in the case of chemicals listed in Part 3 of Annex I, the latest circular issued by the Secretariat pursuant to paragraph 1 indicates that the importing Party has given consent to import.
In the case of chemicals listed in Part 2 of Annex I that are to be exported to OECD countries, the designated national authority of the exporter may, in consultation with the Commission and on a case-by-case basis, decide that no explicit consent is required if the chemical, at the time of importation into the OECD country concerned, is licensed, registered or authorised in that OECD country.
Where explicit consent has been sought pursuant to point (a), if the Commission or the designated national authority of the exporter has not received a response to its request within 30 days, the Commission shall send a reminder. Where appropriate, if there is still no response within a further 30 days, the Commission may send further reminders as necessary.
7.   In the case of chemicals listed in Parts 2 or 3 of Annex I, the designated national authority of the exporter may, in consultation with the Commission and on a case-by-case basis, decide that the export may proceed if, after all reasonable efforts, no response to a request for explicit consent pursuant to paragraph 6(a) has been received within 60 days and there is evidence from official sources in the importing Party or other country that the chemical has been licensed, registered or authorised.
When deciding on the export of chemicals listed in Part 3 of Annex I, the designated national authority in consultation with the Commission shall consider the possible impact on human health or the environment of the use of the chemical in the importing Party or other country.
8.   The validity of each explicit consent obtained pursuant to paragraph 6(a) or waiver granted pursuant to paragraph 7 shall be subject to periodic review by the Commission in consultation with the Member States concerned as follows:
(a)
for each explicit consent obtained pursuant to paragraph 6(a) a new explicit consent shall be required by the end of the third calendar year after the consent was given, unless the terms of that consent require otherwise;
(b)
unless a response to a request has been received in the meantime, each waiver granted pursuant to paragraph 7 shall be for a maximum period of 12 months, upon expiry of which explicit consent shall be required.
In the cases referred to in point (a) of this paragraph, exports may, however, continue after the end of the relevant period, pending a response to a new request for explicit consent, for an additional period of 12 months.
All new requests shall be channelled through the Commission.
9.   The Commission shall register all requests for explicit consent, responses obtained and waivers granted in its database. Each explicit consent obtained or waived shall be assigned an explicit consent reference identification number and shall be listed with all relevant information concerning any conditions attached, validity dates, etc. The non-confidential information shall be made publicly available on the Internet.
10.   No chemical shall be exported later than six months before its expiry date, when such a date exists or can be inferred from the production date, unless the intrinsic properties of the chemical render that impracticable. In particular, in the case of pesticides, exporters shall ensure that the size and packaging of containers is optimised so as to minimise the risks of creating obsolete stocks.
11.   When exporting pesticides, exporters shall ensure that the label contains specific information about storage conditions and storage stability under the climatic conditions of the importing Party or other country. In addition, they shall ensure that the pesticides exported comply with the purity specification laid down in Community legislation.
