Article 3
Definitions
For the purposes of this Regulation, the following definitions shall apply:
1.
‘chemical’ means a substance as defined in Directive 67/548/EEC, whether by itself or in a preparation, or a preparation, whether manufactured or obtained from nature, but does not include living organisms, which belongs to either of the following categories:
(a)
pesticides, including severely hazardous pesticide formulations;
(b)
industrial chemicals;
2.
‘preparation’ means a mixture or a solution composed of two or more substances;
3.
‘article’ means a finished product containing or including a chemical, the use of which has been banned or severely restricted by Community legislation in that particular product;
4.
‘pesticides’ means chemicals in either of the following subcategories:
(a)
pesticides used as plant protection products covered by Council Directive 91/414/EEC of 15 July 1991 concerning the placing of plant protection products on the market (21);
(b)
other pesticides, such as biocidal products under Directive 98/8/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 February 1998 concerning the placing of biocidal products on the market (22) and such as disinfectants, insecticides and parasiticides covered by Directive 2001/82/EC and Directive 2001/83/EC;
5.
‘industrial chemicals’ means chemicals in either of the following subcategories:
(a)
chemicals for use by professionals;
(b)
chemicals for use by the public;
6.
‘chemical subject to export notification’ means any chemical that is banned or severely restricted within the Community within one or more categories or subcategories, and any chemical listed in Part 1 of Annex I that is subject to the PIC procedure;
7.
‘chemical qualifying for PIC notification’ means any chemical that is banned or severely restricted within the Community or a Member State within one or more categories. Chemicals banned or severely restricted in the Community within one or more categories are listed in Part 2 of Annex I;
8.
‘chemical subject to the PIC procedure’ means any chemical listed in Annex III to the Convention and in Part 3 of Annex I to this Regulation;
9.
‘banned chemical’ means either of the following:
(a)
a chemical all uses of which within one or more categories or subcategories have been prohibited by final regulatory action by the Community, in order to protect human health or the environment;
(b)
a chemical that has been refused approval for first-time use or has been withdrawn by industry either from the Community market or from further consideration in a notification, registration or approval process and where there is evidence that the chemical raises concern for human health or the environment;
10.
‘severely restricted chemical’ means either of the following:
(a)
a chemical, virtually all use of which within one or more categories or subcategories has been prohibited by final regulatory action by the Community in order to protect human health or the environment, but for which certain specific uses remain allowed;
(b)
a chemical that has, for virtually all use, been refused for approval or been withdrawn by industry either from the Community market or from further consideration in a notification, registration or approval process, and where there is evidence that the chemical raises concern for human health or the environment;
11.
‘chemical banned or severely restricted by a Member State’ means any chemical that is banned or severely restricted by national final regulatory action of a Member State;
12.
‘final regulatory action’ means a legislative act the purpose of which is to ban or severely restrict a chemical;
13.
‘severely hazardous pesticide formulation’ means a chemical formulated for use as a pesticide that produces severe health or environmental effects observable within a short period of time after single or multiple exposure, under conditions of use;
14.
‘export’ means the following:
(a)
the permanent or temporary export of a chemical meeting the conditions of Article 23(2) of the Treaty;
(b)
the re-export of a chemical not meeting the conditions of Article 23(2) of the Treaty which is placed under a customs procedure other than the external Community transit procedure for movement of goods through the customs territory of the Community;
15.
‘import’ means the physical introduction into the customs territory of the Community of a chemical that is placed under a customs procedure other than the external Community transit procedure for movement of goods through the customs territory of the Community;
16.
‘exporter’ means any of the following persons, whether natural or legal:
(a)
the person on whose behalf an export declaration is made, that is to say the person who, at the time when the declaration is accepted, holds the contract with the consignee in a Party or other country and has the power to determine that the chemical be sent out of the customs territory of the Community;
(b)
where no export contract has been concluded or where the holder of the contract does not act on its own behalf, the person who has the power to determine that the chemical be sent out of the customs territory of the Community;
(c)
where the benefit of a right to dispose of the chemical belongs to a person established outside the Community pursuant to the contract on which the export is based, the contracting party established in the Community;
17.
‘importer’ means any natural or legal person who at the time of import into the customs territory of the Community is the consignee for the chemical;
18.
‘Party to the Convention’ or ‘Party’ means a State or a regional economic integration organisation that has consented to be bound by the Convention and for which the Convention is in force;
19.
‘other country’ means any country that is not a Party.
