Article 7
Export notifications forwarded to Parties and other countries
1.   In the case of substances listed in Part 1 of Annex I or preparations containing such substances in a concentration that could trigger labelling obligations under Directive 1999/45/EC irrespective of the presence of any other substances, paragraphs 2 to 8 shall apply.
2.   When an exporter is due to export a chemical referred to in paragraph 1 from the Community to a Party or other country for the first time on or after the date on which it becomes subject to this Regulation, the exporter shall notify the designated national authority of the Member State in which he is established, no later than 30 days before the export of the chemical is due to take place. Thereafter the exporter shall notify the designated national authority of the first export of such chemical each calendar year no later than 15 days before the export takes place. The notification shall comply with the requirements set out in Annex II.
The designated national authority shall check compliance of the information with Annex II and promptly forward the notification received from the exporter to the Commission.
The Commission shall take the measures necessary to ensure that the designated national authority of the importing Party or the appropriate authority of the importing other country receive notification no later than 15 days before the first intended export of the chemical and thereafter before the first export in any subsequent calendar year. This shall apply regardless of the expected use of the chemical in the importing Party or other country.
Each export notification shall be registered and assigned an export reference identification number in a database at the Commission, and an updated list of the chemicals concerned and the importing Parties and other countries for each calendar year shall be kept available to the public and distributed to the designated national authorities of the Member States as appropriate.
3.   If the Commission does not receive from the importing Party or other country an acknowledgement of receipt of the first export notification given after the chemical is included in the Part 1 of Annex I within 30 days of the dispatch of such notification, it shall submit a second notification. The Commission shall make reasonable efforts to ensure that the designated national authority of the importing Party or the appropriate authority of the importing other country receives the second notification.
4.   A new export notification as provided for in paragraph 2 shall be given for exports which take place subsequent to changes to Community legislation concerning the marketing, use or labelling of the substances in question or whenever the composition of the preparation in question changes so that the labelling of such preparation is altered. The new notification shall comply with the requirements set out in Annex II and shall indicate that it is a revision of a previous notification.
5.   Where the export of a chemical relates to an emergency situation in which any delay may endanger public health or the environment in the importing Party or other country, the requirements of paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 may be waived wholly or partly at the discretion of the designated national authority of the exporting Member State, in consultation with the Commission.
6.   The obligations set out in paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 shall cease when the following conditions are fulfilled:
(a)
the chemical has become a chemical subject to the PIC procedure;
(b)
the importing country being a Party to the Convention has provided the Secretariat with a response in accordance with Article 10(2) of the Convention indicating whether or not it consents to import of the chemical;
(c)
the Commission has been informed of that response by the Secretariat and has forwarded that information to Member States.
The first subparagraph shall not apply where the importing country being Party to the Convention explicitly requires continued export notification by exporting Parties, for example through its import decision or otherwise.
The obligations set out in paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 shall also cease when the following conditions are fulfilled:
(a)
the designated national authority of the importing Party or the appropriate authority of the importing other country has waived the requirement to be notified before the export of the chemical;
(b)
the Commission has received the information from the Secretariat or from the designated national authority of the importing Party or the appropriate authority of the importing other country and has forwarded it to Member States and made it available on the Internet.
7.   The Commission, the relevant designated national authorities of the Member States and the exporters shall provide importing Parties and other countries with available additional information concerning the exported chemicals, when requested.
8.   Member States may establish systems obliging exporters to pay an administrative fee for each export notification given and for each request for explicit consent made, corresponding to the costs to them of carrying out the procedures set out in paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 of this Article and in Article 13(3), (6) and (7).
