Article 5
Participation of the Community in the Convention
1.   The participation of the Community in the Convention shall be a joint responsibility of the Commission and the Member States, in particular as regards technical assistance, the exchange of information and matters relating to dispute settlement, participation in subsidiary bodies and voting.
2.   With regard to the Community's participation in the Convention, for the administrative functions of the Convention with reference to the PIC procedure and the export notification, the Commission shall act as a common designated authority on behalf of and in close cooperation and consultation with all the designated national authorities of the Member States.
The Commission shall, in particular, be responsible for the following:
(a)
the transmission of Community export notifications to Parties and other countries pursuant to Article 7;
(b)
the submission to the Secretariat of the Convention, hereinafter ‘the Secretariat’, of notifications of relevant final regulatory actions concerning chemicals qualifying for PIC notification pursuant to Article 10;
(c)
the transmission of information concerning other final regulatory actions involving chemicals not qualifying for PIC notification in accordance with Article 11;
(d)
the receiving of information from the Secretariat more generally.
The Commission shall also provide the Secretariat with Community import responses for chemicals subject to the PIC procedure pursuant to Article 12.
In addition, the Commission shall coordinate the Community input on all technical issues relating to any of the following:
(a)
the Convention;
(b)
the preparation of the Conference of the Parties established by Article 18 of the Convention;
(c)
the Chemical Review Committee established in accordance with Article 18(6) of the Convention;
(d)
other subsidiary bodies.
A network of Member State rapporteurs shall be established, as appropriate, to deal with the preparation of technical documents such as decision guidance documents as referred to in Article 7(3) of the Convention.
3.   The Commission and the Member States shall take the necessary initiatives to ensure appropriate representation of the Community in the various bodies implementing the Convention.
