Article 4
Data sources and methods
1.   For the purpose of obtaining the data referred to in this Regulation, Member States shall use one or more of the following sources or methods, provided that the information allows for the production of statistics that meet the quality requirements laid down in Article 11:
(a)
statistical surveys;
(b)
the administrative data sources specified in paragraph 2 of this Article;
(c)
other sources, methods or innovative approaches.
2.   Member States may use information from the integrated administration and control system (IACS) established by Regulation (EU) No 1307/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council (16), the system for the identification and registration of bovine animals established by Regulation (EC) No 1760/2000 of the European Parliament and of the Council (17) and the system for the identification and registration of ovine and caprine animals established by Council Regulation (EC) No 21/2004 (18), the vineyard register implemented in accordance with Article 145 of Regulation (EU) No 1308/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council (19), and the organic farming registers set up pursuant to Council Regulation (EC) No 834/2007 (20). Member States may also use administrative sources associated with specific rural development measures.
3.   Member States which decide to use the sources, methods or innovative approaches referred to in point (c) of paragraph 1 shall inform the Commission (Eurostat) during the year preceding the reference year and shall provide details concerning the quality of the data obtained from that source, method or innovative approach and the data collection methods to be used.
4.   National authorities responsible for fulfilling the requirements of this Regulation shall have the right to access and use data, promptly and free of charge, including individual data on agricultural holdings and personal data on their holders contained in administrative files compiled on their national territory pursuant to Article 17a of Regulation (EC) No 223/2009. The national authorities and the owners of the administrative records shall establish the necessary cooperation mechanisms.
