Article 56
On-site inspections
1.   In order to carry out its duties under this Regulation, ESMA may conduct all necessary on-site inspections at the business premises, land or property of the legal persons referred to in Article 54(1). Where the proper conduct and efficiency of the inspection so require, ESMA may carry out the on-site inspection without prior announcement.
2.   The officials of and other persons authorised by ESMA to conduct an on-site inspection may enter any business premises, land or property of the legal persons subject to an investigation decision adopted by ESMA and shall have all the powers referred to in Article 55(1). They shall also have the power to seal any business premises, property and books or records for the period of, and to the extent necessary for, the inspection.
3.   The officials of and other persons authorised by ESMA to conduct an on-site inspection shall exercise their powers upon production of a written authorisation specifying the subject matter and purpose of the inspection and the periodic penalty payments provided for in Article 61 where the persons concerned do not submit to the inspection. In good time before the inspection, ESMA shall give notice of the inspection to the competent authority of the Member State where the inspection is to be conducted.
4.   The persons referred to in Article 54(1) shall submit to on-site inspections ordered by a decision of ESMA. The decision shall specify the subject matter and purpose of the inspection, appoint the date on which it is to begin and indicate the periodic penalty payments provided for in Article 61, the legal remedies available under Regulation (EU) No 1095/2010 as well as the right to have the decision reviewed by the Court of Justice. ESMA shall take such decisions after consulting the competent authority of the Member State where the inspection is to be conducted.
5.   Officials of, as well as those authorised or appointed by, the competent authority of the Member State where the inspection is to be conducted shall, at the request of ESMA, actively assist the officials of, and other persons authorised by, ESMA. To that end, they shall enjoy the powers set out in paragraph 2. Officials of that competent authority may also attend the on-site inspections upon request.
6.   ESMA may require competent authorities of the Member State where the inspection is to be conducted to carry out on its behalf specific investigatory tasks and on-site inspections as provided for in this Article and in Article 55(1). To that end, the competent authorities shall enjoy the same powers as ESMA as set out in this Article and in Article 55(1).
7.   Where the officials of, and other accompanying persons authorised by, ESMA find that a person opposes an inspection ordered pursuant to this Article, the competent authority of the Member State concerned shall afford them the necessary assistance, requesting, where appropriate, the assistance of the police or of an equivalent enforcement authority, to enable them to conduct their on-site inspection.
8.   If the on-site inspection provided for in paragraph 1 or the assistance provided for in paragraph 7 requires authorisation by a judicial authority pursuant to applicable national law, ESMA shall apply for such authorisation. ESMA may also apply for such authorisation as a precautionary measure.
9.   Where authorisation as referred to in paragraph 8 is applied for, the national judicial authority shall verify that ESMA’s decision is authentic and that the coercive measures envisaged are neither arbitrary nor excessive having regard to the subject matter of the inspection. In its verification of the proportionality of the coercive measures, the national judicial authority may ask ESMA for detailed explanations, in particular relating to the grounds ESMA has for suspecting that an infringement of this Regulation has taken place, as well as to the seriousness of the suspected infringement and the nature of the involvement of the person who is subject to the coercive measures. However, the national judicial authority shall not review the necessity of the investigation or demand that it be provided with the information on ESMA’s file. The lawfulness of ESMA’s decision shall be subject to review only by the Court of Justice following the procedure set out in Regulation (EU) No 1095/2010.
