Article 15
Publication on the issuer’s website and notification to ESMA and competent authorities
1.   Issuers of European Green Bonds shall publish on their websites and make available, free of charge and in accordance with Article 21(3) and (4) of Regulation (EU) 2017/1129, until at least 12 months have elapsed after the maturity of those bonds, the following, including any amendments or corrections thereto:
(a)
before the bond is issued, the completed European Green Bond factsheet referred to in Article 10 of this Regulation;
(b)
before the bond is issued, the pre-issuance review related to the European Green Bond factsheet referred to in Article 10 of this Regulation;
(c)
before the bond is issued, a link to the website where the prospectus can be consulted in cases where a prospectus is published pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2017/1129;
(d)
without undue delay after they are drawn up in accordance with Article 11(1) of this Regulation, the European Green Bond allocation reports;
(e)
without undue delay after they are obtained, the post-issuance reviews of the European Green Bond allocation reports referred to in Article 11 of this Regulation;
(f)
without undue delay after it is drawn up in accordance with Article 12 of this Regulation, the European Green Bond impact report;
(g)
where applicable, the CapEx plan;
(h)
where applicable, the impact report review referred to in Article 12(3) of this Regulation.
By way of derogation from the first subparagraph, point (d), where a post-issuance review of a European Green Bond allocation report takes place, that allocation report shall be published without undue delay after the post-issuance review is obtained.
2.   The information contained in the documents referred to in paragraph 1, first subparagraph, points (a), (d) and (f), shall be provided, at the choice of the issuer, either in a language customary in the sphere of international finance, or:
(a)
where the European Green Bonds are offered to the public or are admitted to trading in only one Member State, in a language accepted by the competent authority of that Member State;
(b)
where the European Green Bonds are offered to the public or are admitted to trading in two or more Member States, in a language accepted by the competent authority of each of those Member States.
3.   By way of derogation from paragraph 2 of this Article, where a prospectus for the European Green Bond is to be published pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2017/1129, the information contained in the documents referred to in paragraph 1, first subparagraph, points (a), (d) and (f), of this Article shall be provided in the language or languages of that prospectus.
4.   Where applicable, issuers shall notify the competent authorities referred to in Article 44(1) and (2), of the publication of each of the documents referred to in paragraph 1, first subparagraph, of this Article without undue delay after each publication.
5.   Issuers shall notify ESMA of the publication of all documents referred to in paragraph 1, first subparagraph, within 30 days of their publication.
