Article 21
Periodic post-issuance disclosures for issuers of bonds marketed as environmentally sustainable or of sustainability-linked bonds
1.   Issuers of bonds marketed as environmentally sustainable and of sustainability-linked bonds may make periodic disclosures of post-issuance information by means of common templates.
Where an issuer makes periodic disclosures of post-issuance information in accordance with the first subparagraph of this paragraph, Article 44 shall apply until the maturity of the bond.
2.   For an issuer of bonds marketed as environmentally sustainable, the templates referred to in paragraph 1 shall include at least the following elements:
(a)
where the issuer is subject to an obligation to publish plans pursuant to Article 19a(2), point (a)(iii), or, Article 29a(2), point (a)(iii), of Directive 2013/34/EU, or where the issuer voluntarily published such plans, the manner in which the bond proceeds contribute to the implementation of those plans;
(b)
where the issuer is subject to the obligation to disclose information pursuant to Article 8 of Regulation (EU) 2020/852, the manner in which the bond proceeds contribute to the issuer’s taxonomy-aligned turnover, capital expenditure and operating expenditure;
(c)
the minimum proportion of bond proceeds that are used for activities that are environmentally sustainable under Article 3 of Regulation (EU) 2020/852.
3.   For an issuer of sustainability-linked bonds, the templates referred to in paragraph 1 shall include at least the following elements:
(a)
the rationale, level of ambition, materiality, and calculation methodology of the key performance indicators set by the issuer;
(b)
where the issuer is subject to an obligation to publish plans pursuant to Article 19a(2), point (a)(iii), or Article 29a(2), point (a)(iii), of Directive 2013/34/EU, or where the issuer voluntarily published such plans, the manner in which the bond proceeds are intended to contribute to the implementation of those plans;
(c)
where relevant, the manner in which the bond proceeds are linked to the issuer’s taxonomy-aligned turnover, capital expenditure and operating expenditure by applying Delegated Regulation (EU) 2021/2178;
(d)
a description of the bond structure, including the coupon adjustment mechanism.
4.   The Commission shall adopt a delegated act in accordance with Article 68 by 21 December 2024 to supplement this Regulation by establishing the content, methodologies and presentation of the information to be disclosed in the templates referred to in paragraphs 2 and 3 of this Article.
When drafting that delegated act, the Commission shall take into account the information on environmental, social and governance aspects that is required to be disclosed under other relevant legislative acts, including Regulation (EU) 2017/1129, in order to avoid overlapping disclosures for issuers.
When drafting that delegated act, the Commission shall also consider the information needs of financial market participants subject to the disclosure requirements of Regulation (EU) 2019/2088.
