Article 52
Publication of decisions
1.   A decision imposing an administrative penalty or other administrative measure for an infringement of this Regulation shall be published by competent authorities on their official websites immediately after the person subject to that decision has been informed of that decision. The publication shall include information on the type and nature of the infringement and the identity of the persons responsible. That obligation shall not apply to decisions imposing measures that are of an investigatory nature.
2.   Where the publication of the identity of the legal persons, or of the identity or personal data of natural persons, is considered by the competent authority to be disproportionate following a case-by-case assessment conducted on the proportionality of the publication of such data, or where such publication would jeopardise the stability of financial markets or an ongoing investigation, competent authorities shall do one of the following:
(a)
defer the publication of the decision to impose an administrative penalty or other administrative measure until the moment where the reasons for non-publication cease to exist;
(b)
publish the decision to impose an administrative penalty or other administrative measure on an anonymous basis in a manner which is in conformity with national law, where such anonymous publication ensures the effective protection of the personal data concerned;
(c)
not publish the decision to impose an administrative penalty or other administrative measure in the event that the options provided for in points (a) and (b) are considered insufficient to ensure:
(i)
that the stability of financial markets would not be put in jeopardy; or
(ii)
the proportionality of the publication of such a decision with regard to measures which are deemed to be of a minor nature.
In the case of a decision to publish an administrative penalty or other administrative measure on an anonymous basis, as referred to in point (b) of the first subparagraph, the publication of the relevant data may be deferred for a reasonable period where it is expected that within that period the reasons for anonymous publication will cease to exist.
3.   Where the decision to impose an administrative penalty or other administrative measure is under appeal before the relevant court or administrative body, the competent authority referred to in Article 44(1) and (2) shall also publish, immediately, on its official website such information and any subsequent information on the outcome of such appeal. Moreover, any decision annulling a previous decision to impose an administrative penalty or other administrative measure shall also be published.
4.   Competent authorities shall ensure that any publication in accordance with this Article shall remain on their official website for a period of at least five years after its publication. Personal data contained in the publication shall be limited to what is necessary for the purposes of the specific case and shall be kept on the official website of the competent authority only for the period which is necessary in accordance with the applicable data protection rules.
