Article 35
Conflicts of interest and confidentiality of information
1.   External reviewers shall identify, eliminate or manage, and disclose in a transparent manner in their reviews, any actual or potential conflicts of interest that concern any of the following:
(a)
their analysts or employees;
(b)
shareholders holding at least 10 % of the capital or the voting rights of the external reviewers or in a company which has the power to exercise control or a dominant influence over the external reviewers;
(c)
any person that is contractually related to the external reviewers and that is directly involved in assessment activities;
(d)
any person approving the reviews.
2.   Before entering into a contract with an issuer for the provision of services, the external reviewer shall conduct a pre-contractual assessment of whether there is an actual or potential conflict of interest, and shall document that assessment. The external reviewer shall update the pre-contractual assessment and the relating documentation when a material change to the risk of a conflict of interest arises after the conclusion of the contract between the external reviewer and the issuer.
The external reviewer shall not issue a review where it identifies an actual conflict of interest and the external reviewer is not able to implement measures to eliminate or manage that conflict of interest.
3.   Fees charged by external reviewers for assessment services shall not depend on the result of the reviews, or on any other result or outcome of the work performed.
4.   Analysts, employees of the external reviewer and any other person contractually related to the external reviewers and directly involved in assessment activities shall be bound by the obligation of professional secrecy.
5.   External reviewers shall ensure that their analysts and employees or any other natural person contractually related to the external reviewers and directly involved in assessment activities comply with the following:
(a)
take all reasonable measures to protect property and records in the possession of the external reviewer from fraud, theft or misuse, taking into account the nature, scale and complexity of their business and the nature and range of their assessment activities;
(b)
do not disclose any information about reviews, and possible future reviews, to any parties other than the issuers that have requested the assessment by the external reviewer;
(c)
do not use or share confidential information for any other purpose than assessment activities.
