Article 5
Public sector leading on energy efficiency
1.   Member States shall ensure that the total final energy consumption of all public bodies combined is reduced by at least 1,9 % each year, when compared to 2021.
Member States may choose to exclude public transport or the armed forces from the obligation laid down in the first subparagraph.
For the purposes of the first and second subparagraphs, Member States shall establish a baseline, which includes the final energy consumption of all public bodies, except in public transport or the armed forces, for 2021. Energy consumption reduction of public transport and armed forces is indicative and may still count for fulfilling the obligation under the first subparagraph even if excluded from the baseline under this Article.
2.   During a transitional period ending on 11 October 2027 the target set out in paragraph 1 shall be indicative. During that transitional period, Member States may use estimated consumption data, and, by the same date, Member States shall adjust the baseline and align the estimated final energy consumption of all public bodies to the actual final energy consumption of all public bodies.
3.   The obligation laid down in paragraph 1 shall not include, until 31 December 2026, the energy consumption of public bodies in local administrative units with a population of less than 50 000 and, until 31 December 2029, the energy consumption of public bodies in local administrative units with a population of less than 5 000 inhabitants.
4.   A Member State may take into account climatic variations within it when calculating its public bodies’ final energy consumption.
5.   Member States shall include in the updates, submitted pursuant to Article 14(2) of Regulation (EU) 2018/1999, of their national energy and climate plans, notified pursuant to Article 3 and Articles 7 to 12 of that Regulation, the amount of energy consumption reduction to be achieved by all public bodies, disaggregated by sector, and the measures that they plan to adopt for the purpose of achieving those reductions. As part of their integrated national energy and climate progress reports submitted pursuant to Article 17 of Regulation (EU) 2018/1999, Member States shall report to the Commission the final energy consumption reduction achieved every year.
6.   Member States shall ensure that regional and local authorities establish specific energy efficiency measures in their long-term planning tools, such as decarbonisation or sustainable energy plans, after consulting relevant stakeholders, including energy agencies where appropriate, and the public, including, in particular, vulnerable groups which are at risk of being affected by energy poverty or are more susceptible to its effects.
Member States shall also ensure that the competent authorities take actions to mitigate significant negative direct or indirect impacts of energy efficiency measures on energy poor, low-income households or vulnerable groups when designing and implementing energy efficiency measures.
7.   Member States shall support public bodies. Such support may, without prejudice to the State aid rules, include financial and technical support, for the purpose of taking up energy efficiency improvement measures and encouraging public bodies to take into account the wider benefits beyond energy savings, for example the quality of the indoor environment, including at regional and local level, by providing guidelines, promoting competence building, the acquisition of skills and training opportunities, and by encouraging cooperation among public bodies.
8.   Member States shall encourage public bodies to consider life cycle carbon emissions as well as the economic and social benefits of their public bodies’ investment and policy activities.
9.   Member States shall encourage public bodies to improve the energy performance of buildings owned or occupied by public bodies, including by means of the replacement of old and inefficient heaters.
