Article 35
Review and monitoring of implementation
1.   In the context of its State of the Energy Union report submitted pursuant to Article 35 of Regulation (EU) 2018/1999, the Commission shall report on the functioning of the carbon market in accordance with Article 35(1) and Article 35(2), point (c), of that Regulation, taking into consideration the effects of the implementation of this Directive.
2.   By 31 October 2025 and every four years thereafter, the Commission shall evaluate the existing measures to achieve energy efficiency increase and decarbonisation in heating and cooling. The evaluation shall take into account all of the following:
(a)
energy efficiency and GHG emissions trends in heating and cooling, including in district heating and cooling;
(b)
interlinkages between measures taken;
(c)
changes in energy efficiency and greenhouse gas emissions in the heating and cooling;
(d)
existing and planned energy efficiency policies and measures and greenhouse gas reduction policies and measures at Union and national level;
(e)
measures which Member States provided in their comprehensive assessments pursuant to Article 25(1) of this Directive and notified in accordance with Article 17(1) of Regulation (EU) 2018/1999.
By 31 October 2025 and every four years thereafter, the Commission shall submit a report to the European Parliament and to the Council on that evaluation and, if appropriate, propose measures to ensure the achievement of the Union’s climate and energy targets.
3.   Member States shall submit to the Commission before 30 April each year statistics on national electricity and heat production from high and low efficiency cogeneration, in accordance with the general principles set out in Annex II, in relation to total heat and electricity production. They shall also submit annual statistics on cogeneration heat and electricity capacities and fuels for cogeneration, and on district heating and cooling production and capacities, in relation to total heat and electricity production and capacities. Member States shall submit statistics on primary energy savings achieved by the application of cogeneration in accordance with the methodology set out in Annex III.
4.   By 1 January 2021, the Commission shall submit a report to the European Parliament and to the Council, on the basis of an assessment of the potential for energy efficiency in conversion, transformation, transmission, transportation and storage of energy, accompanied, where appropriate, by legislative proposals.
5.   By 31 December 2021, the Commission shall, subject to any changes to the provisions relating to retail markets in Directive 2009/73/EC, carry out an assessment, and submit a report to the European Parliament and to the Council, on the provisions related to metering, billing and consumer information for natural gas, with the aim of aligning them, where appropriate, with the relevant provisions for electricity in Directive (EU) 2019/944, in order to strengthen consumer protection and enable final customers to receive more frequent, clear and up-to-date information about their natural gas consumption and to regulate their energy use. As soon as possible after the submission of that report, the Commission shall, where appropriate, adopt legislative proposals.
6.   By 31 October 2022, the Commission shall assess whether the Union has achieved its 2020 headline targets on energy efficiency.
7.   By 28 February 2027 and every five years thereafter, the Commission shall evaluate the implementation of this Directive and submit a report to the European Parliament and to the Council.
That evaluation shall include:
(a)
an assessment of the general effectiveness of this Directive and the need to further adjust the Union’s energy efficiency policy in accordance with the objectives of the Paris Agreement and in light of economic and innovation developments;
(b)
a detailed assessment of the aggregated macroeconomic impact of this Directive, with an emphasis on the effects on the Union’s energy security, energy prices, minimising energy poverty, economic growth, competitiveness, job creation, mobility cost and household purchasing power;
(c)
the Union’s 2030 headline targets on energy efficiency set out in Article 4(1) with a view to revising those targets upwards in the event of substantial cost reductions resulting from economic or technological developments, or where needed to meet the Union’s decarbonisation targets for 2040 or 2050, or its international commitments for decarbonisation;
(d)
whether Member States are to continue to achieve new annual savings in accordance with Article 8(1), first subparagraph, point (b)(iv), for a ten-year periods after 2030;
(e)
whether Member States are to continue to ensure that at least 3 % of the total floor area of heated and/or cooled buildings that are owned by public bodies is renovated each year in accordance with Article 6(1) with a view to revising the renovation rate in that Article;
(f)
whether Member States are to continue to achieve a share of energy savings among people affected by energy poverty, vulnerable customers and, where applicable, people living in social housing, pursuant to Article 8(3) for the ten-year periods after 2030;
(g)
whether Member States are to continue to achieve a reduction of final energy consumption in accordance with Article 5(1);
(h)
the impacts of this Directive on supporting economic growth, increasing industrial output, the deployment of renewables or advanced efforts to climate neutrality.
The evaluation shall also cover the effects on efforts to electrify the economy and the introduction of hydrogen, including whether any change to the treatment of clean renewable energy sources might be justified, and shall propose, where appropriate, solutions to any potentially identified adverse effect.
That report shall be accompanied by a detailed assessment of whether there is a need to amend this Directive in the interests of regulatory simplification and, where appropriate, by proposals for further measures.
8.   By 31 October 2032, the Commission shall assess whether the Union has achieved its 2030 headline targets on energy efficiency.
