Article 28
Availability of qualification, accreditation and certification schemes
1.   Member States shall set up a network ensuring the appropriate level of competences for energy efficiency-related professions that corresponds to market needs. Member States, in close cooperation with the social partners, shall ensure that certification or equivalent qualification schemes, including, where necessary, suitable training programmes, are available for energy efficiency-related professions including providers of energy services, providers of energy audits, energy managers, independent experts, installers of building elements as referred to in Directive 2010/31/EU, and providers of integrated renovation works, and are reliable and contribute to national energy efficiency objectives and the overall Union decarbonisation objectives.
Member States shall ensure that providers of certification or equivalent qualification schemes, including, where necessary, suitable training programmes are accredited in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council (47) or approved in line with converging national legislation or standards.
2.   Member States shall promote participation in certification, training and education programmes to ensure the appropriate level of competences for energy efficiency professions that correspond to market needs.
3.   By 11 October 2024, the Commission shall:
(a)
in cooperation with a group of experts nominated by Member States, set up a framework for or design a campaign to attract more people to energy efficiency professions while ensuring respect for the principle of non-discrimination;
(b)
assess the viability of setting up a single point of access platform, making use of existing initiatives where possible, to provide support to the Member States in setting up their measures to ensure the appropriate level of qualified professionals needed to keep up with the pace of progress in energy efficiency to reach the Union’s climate and energy targets. The platform would gather experts from Member States, the social partners, education institutions, academia and other relevant stakeholders to foster and promote best practices of qualification schemes and training programmes to ensure more energy efficiency professionals and to re-skill or up-skill existing professionals in order to meet market needs.
4.   Member States shall ensure that national certification, or equivalent qualification schemes, including, where necessary, training programmes, take into account existing European or international standards on energy efficiency.
5.   Member States shall make publicly available the certification, equivalent qualification schemes or suitable training programmes referred to in paragraph 1, and shall cooperate among themselves and with the Commission on comparisons between, and recognition of, the schemes.
Member States shall take appropriate measures to make consumers aware of the availability of the schemes in accordance with Article 29(1).
6.   By 31 December 2024 and at least every four years thereafter, Member States shall assess whether the schemes ensure the necessary level of competences and equal access to all individuals in accordance with the principle of non-discrimination for energy services providers, energy auditors, energy managers, independent experts, installers of building elements as referred to in Directive 2010/31/EU, and providers of integrated renovation works. Member States shall also assess the gap between available and in demand professionals. Member States shall make the assessment and recommendations thereof publicly available and submit them through the e-platform established in accordance with Article 28 of Regulation (EU) 2018/1999.
