Article 40
Suspension of payments in relation to the annual clearance
1.   Where Member States do not submit the documents referred to in Article 9(3) and Article 12(2) by the deadlines provided for in Article 9(3), the Commission may adopt implementing acts suspending the total amount of the monthly payments referred to in Article 21(3). The Commission shall reimburse the suspended amounts when it receives the missing documents from the Member State concerned, provided that the date of receipt is not later than six months after the deadline concerned.
As regards the interim payments referred to in Article 32, declarations of expenditure shall be deemed inadmissible in accordance with paragraph 7 of that Article.
2.   Where, in the framework of the annual performance clearance referred to in Article 54, the Commission establishes that the difference between the expenditure declared and the amount corresponding to the relevant reported output is more than 50 % and the Member State cannot provide duly justified reasons, the Commission may adopt implementing acts suspending the monthly payments referred to in Article 21(3) or the interim payments referred to in Article 32.
The suspension shall be applied to the relevant expenditure in respect of the interventions which have been subject to the reduction referred to in Article 54(2) and the amount to be suspended shall not exceed the percentage corresponding to the reduction applied in accordance with Article 54(2). The amounts suspended shall be reimbursed by the Commission to the Member States or permanently reduced at the latest by means of the implementing act referred to in Article 54 relating to the year for which the payments were suspended. However, if Member States demonstrate that the necessary corrective actions have been taken, the Commission may lift the suspension earlier in a separate implementing act.
3.   The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 102 supplementing this Regulation with rules on the rate of suspension of payments.
4.   The implementing acts provided for in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article shall be adopted in accordance with the advisory procedure referred to in Article 103(2).
Before adopting the implementing acts referred to in paragraph 1 and in paragraph 2, first subparagraph, of this Article, the Commission shall inform the Member State concerned of its intention and shall give the Member State the opportunity to submit its comments within a period which shall not be less than 30 days.
5.   The implementing acts determining the monthly payments referred to in Article 21(3) or the interim payments referred to in Article 32 shall take account of the implementing acts adopted under this Article.
