Article 69
Geo-spatial and animal-based application system
1.   As regards the aid for the area-based interventions referred to in Article 65(2) and implemented under their CAP Strategic Plans, Member States shall require the submission of an application by means of the geo-spatial application form provided by the competent authority.
2.   As regards the aid for the animal-based interventions referred to in Article 65(2) and implemented under their CAP Strategic Plans, Member States shall require the submission of an application.
3.   Member States shall pre-fill the applications referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article with information from the systems referred to in Article 66(1), point (g), and in Articles 68, 70, 71 and 73 or from any other relevant public database.
4.   Member States may set up an automatic claim system and decide which applications referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 it shall cover.
5.   If a Member State decides to use an automatic claim system, it shall set up a system which enables the administration to make the payments to the beneficiaries on the basis of the existing information in the official computerised databases. Where there has been a change, that existing information shall be supplemented with additional information, where necessary, to cover that change. The existing information and additional information available through the automatic claim system shall be confirmed by the beneficiary.
6.   Member States shall annually assess the quality of the geo-spatial application system in accordance with the methodology set up at Union level.
Where the assessment reveals deficiencies in the system, Member States shall adopt appropriate remedial actions or, failing that, shall be requested by the Commission to set up an action plan in accordance with Article 42.
An assessment report and, where appropriate, the remedial actions and the timetable for their implementation shall be submitted to the Commission by 15 February following the calendar year concerned.
