Article 16
Agricultural reserve
1.   A Union agricultural reserve (‘the reserve’) shall be established at the beginning of each year in the EAGF to provide additional support for the agricultural sector for the purpose of market management or stabilisation and to respond promptly in the case of crises affecting the agricultural production or distribution.
The appropriations for the reserve shall be entered directly in the Union budget. Funds from the reserve shall be made available, in the financial year or years for which additional support is required, for the following measures:
(a)
measures to stabilise agricultural markets under Articles 8 to 21 of Regulation (EU) No 1308/2013;
(b)
exceptional measures under Articles 219, 220 and 221 of Regulation (EU) No 1308/2013.
2.   The amount of the reserve shall be EUR 450 million in current prices at the beginning of each year of the period 2023-2027, unless a higher amount is set in the Union budget. The Commission may adjust the amount of the reserve during the year, when appropriate, in view of market developments or perspectives in the current or following year and taking into account available appropriations under the EAGF sub-ceiling.
If those available appropriations are not sufficient, financial discipline may be used in accordance with Article 17 of this Regulation, as a last resort, to fund the reserve up to the initial amount referred to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph.
By way of derogation from Article 12(2), third subparagraph, of the Financial Regulation, non-committed appropriations of the reserve shall be carried over to finance the reserve in the following budgetary years until the year 2027.
Moreover, by derogation from Article 12(2), third subparagraph, of the Financial Regulation, the total unused amount of the reserve for crises in the agricultural sector, established by Regulation (EU) No 1306/2013, available at the end of the year 2022 shall be carried over to the year 2023 without being fully returned to the budgetary lines which cover the actions referred to in Article 5(2), point (c), of this Regulation and made available to the extent necessary for the financing of the reserve established by this Article after taking into account appropriations available under the EAGF sub-ceiling. Any appropriations of the reserve for crises in the agricultural sector that remain available after financing the reserve established by this Article shall be returned to the budgetary lines which cover the actions referred to in Article 5(2), point (c), of this Regulation.
