Article 67
Data keeping and sharing
1.   Member States shall record and keep any data and documentation on the annual outputs reported in the context of the annual performance clearance referred to in Article 54, and the reported progress towards targets set out in the CAP Strategic Plan and monitored in accordance with Article 128 of Regulation (EU) 2021/2115.
The data and documentation referred to in the first subparagraph relating to the current calendar year or marketing year and to the previous 10 calendar years or marketing years shall be accessible for consultation through the digital databases of the competent authority of the Member State.
Data used for the area monitoring system may be stored as raw data on a server external to the competent authorities. Those data shall be kept on a server for at least three years.
By way of derogation from the second subparagraph, Member States which acceded to the Union in or after the year 2013 shall only be required to ensure that the data are available for consultation from the year of their accession.
By way of derogation from the second subparagraph, Member States shall only be required to ensure that the data and documentation related to the area monitoring system referred to in Article 66(1), point (c), are available for consultation as of the date of the implementation of the area monitoring system.
2.   Member States may apply the requirements laid down in paragraph 1 at regional level on condition that those requirements and the administrative procedures for recording and accessing data are designed to be uniform throughout the territory of the Member State and enable data to be aggregated at national level.
3.   Member States shall ensure that data sets collected through the integrated system which are relevant for the purposes of Directive 2007/2/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (33) or for monitoring Union policies are shared free of charge between its public authorities and made publicly available at national level. Member States shall also provide the institutions and bodies of the Union with access to those data sets.
4.   Member States shall ensure that data sets collected through the integrated system which are relevant for the production of European statistics in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 223/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council (34) are shared free of charge with the Commission (Eurostat), the national statistical institutes and, where necessary, with other national authorities responsible for the production of European statistics.
5.   Member States shall limit public access to data sets referred to in paragraphs 3 and 4 where such access would adversely affect the confidentiality of personal data, in accordance with Regulation (EU) 2016/679.
6.   Member States shall set up their systems in such a way to ensure that beneficiaries have access to all relevant data related to them regarding the land they use or intend to use, in order to enable them to submit accurate applications.
