Article 55
Conformity procedure
1.   Where the Commission finds that the expenditure referred to in Article 5(2) and Article 6 has not been effected in conformity with Union law, it shall adopt implementing acts determining the amounts to be excluded from Union financing. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the advisory procedure referred to in Article 103(2).
However, as regards the types of intervention referred to in Regulation (EU) 2021/2115, the exclusions from Union financing referred to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph shall only apply in the case of serious deficiencies in the proper functioning of the governance systems of the Member States.
The first subparagraph shall not apply to cases of non-compliance with the eligibility conditions for individual beneficiaries laid down in the CAP Strategic Plans and national rules.
2.   The Commission shall assess the amounts to be excluded on the basis of the gravity of the deficiencies found. In that context, it shall take due account of the nature of those deficiencies and of the financial damage incurred by the Union.
3.   Before the adoption of the implementing act referred to in paragraph 1, the Commission findings and the comments of the Member State concerned to those findings shall be notified between the two parties in writing, following which they shall attempt to reach an agreement on the action to be taken. The Member State concerned shall be given the opportunity to demonstrate that the actual extent of the non-compliance is lower than the Commission’s assessment.
If no agreement is reached, the Member State concerned may request the opening of a procedure aimed at reconciling, within a period of four months, each party’s position. The procedure shall be carried out by a conciliation body. A report on the outcome of that procedure shall be submitted to the Commission. The Commission shall take into account the recommendations of the report before deciding on refusal of the financing and shall provide justification if it decides not to follow those recommendations.
4.   Financing shall not be refused for:
(a)
the expenditure indicated in Article 5(2) which is effected more than 24 months before the Commission notifies the Member State in writing of its findings;
(b)
expenditure on multiannual interventions falling within the scope of Article 5(2) or within the scope of the interventions for rural development referred to in Article 6, where the final obligation of the beneficiary occurs more than 24 months before the Commission notifies the Member State in writing of its findings;
(c)
expenditure on the interventions for rural development referred to in Article 6, other than those referred to in point (b) of this paragraph, for which the payment or, as the case may be, the final payment by the paying agency is made more than 24 months before the Commission notifies the Member State in writing of its findings.
5.   Paragraph 4 shall not apply in the case of:
(a)
aids granted by a Member State for which the Commission has initiated the procedure laid down in Article 108(2) TFEU;
(b)
infringements which the Commission has notified to the Member State concerned by a reasoned opinion in accordance with Article 258 TFEU;
(c)
infringements by Member States of their obligations under Title IV, Chapter III, of this Regulation, provided that the Commission notifies the Member State in writing of its findings within 12 months following receipt of the Member State’s report on the results of its checks on the expenditure concerned.
6.   The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 102 supplementing this Regulation with rules on the criteria and methodology for applying financial corrections.
7.   The Commission shall adopt implementing acts laying down rules on the actions necessary for the purposes of adoption and implementation of the implementing acts referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article, including the rules on information exchange between the Commission and the Member States, on the deadlines to be respected and the conciliation procedure provided for in paragraph 3 of this Article, and on the establishment, tasks, composition and working arrangements of the conciliation body. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 103(3).
