Article 46
Information measures
1.   The provision of information financed pursuant to Article 7, point (e), shall aim, in particular, to help explain, implement and develop the CAP and to raise public awareness of its content and objectives, including its interaction with the climate, the environment and animal welfare. This is done to inform citizens about the challenges faced in agriculture and food, to inform farmers and consumers, to restore consumer confidence following crises through information campaigns, to inform other parties active in rural areas and to promote a more sustainable Union model of agriculture, as well as to help citizens understand it.
It shall supply coherent, evidence-based, objective and comprehensive information, both inside and outside the Union, and outline the communication actions planned in the Commission’s multiannual strategic plan for agriculture and rural development.
2.   The measures referred to in paragraph 1 may consist of:
(a)
annual work programmes or other specific measures presented by third parties;
(b)
activities implemented on the initiative of the Commission.
Those measures which are required by law or those measures already receiving financing under another Union action shall be excluded.
When implementing the activities referred to in the first subparagraph, point (b), the Commission may be assisted by external experts.
The measures referred to in the first subparagraph shall also contribute to the corporate communication of the Union’s political priorities in so far as those priorities are related to the general objectives of this Regulation.
3.   The Commission shall publish once a year a call for proposals respecting the conditions set out in the Financial Regulation.
4.   The committee referred to in Article 103(1) shall be notified of measures envisaged and taken pursuant to this Article.
5.   The Commission shall submit a report on the implementation of this Article to the European Parliament and to the Council every two years.
