Article 32
Interim payments
1.   Interim payments shall be made for each CAP Strategic Plan. They shall be calculated by applying the contribution rate referred to in Article 91 of Regulation (EU) 2021/2115 to the public expenditure effected for each type of intervention, excluding payments made from the additional national financing referred to in Article 115(5) of that Regulation.
Interim payments shall also include the amounts referred to in Article 94(2) of Regulation (EU) 2021/2115.
2.   Subject to the availability of resources, the Commission shall, taking account of reductions or suspensions applied under Articles 39 to 42, make interim payments in order to reimburse the expenditure effected by accredited paying agencies in implementing the CAP Strategic Plans.
3.   Where financial instruments are implemented in accordance with Article 59(1) of Regulation (EU) 2021/1060, the declaration of expenditure shall include the total amounts disbursed or, in the case of guarantees, set aside for guarantee contracts by the managing authority to, or for the benefit of, final recipients as referred to in Article 80(5), first subparagraph, points (a), (b) and (c) of Regulation (EU) 2021/2115.
4.   Where financial instruments are implemented in accordance with Article 59(2) of Regulation (EU) 2021/1060, the declaration of expenditure that includes expenditure for financial instruments shall be submitted in accordance with the following conditions:
(a)
the amount included in the first declaration of expenditure shall have been previously paid to the financial instrument and may be up to 30 % of the total amount of the eligible public expenditure committed to the financial instruments under the relevant funding agreement;
(b)
the amount included in subsequent declarations of expenditure submitted during the eligibility period defined in Article 86(4) of Regulation (EU) 2021/2115 shall include the eligible expenditure referred to in Article 80(5) of that Regulation.
5.   Amounts paid in accordance with paragraph 4, point (a), of this Article shall be considered to be advances for the purposes of Article 37(2). The amount included in the first declaration of expenditure, referred to in paragraph 4, point (a), of this Article, shall be cleared from Commission accounts no later than in the annual accounts for the last implementation year for the relevant CAP Strategic Plan.
6.   Each interim payment shall be made by the Commission, subject to compliance with the following requirements:
(a)
transmission to the Commission of a declaration of expenditure signed by the accredited paying agency, in accordance with Article 90(1), point (c);
(b)
no overrun of the total EAFRD contribution to each type of intervention for the entire period covered by the CAP Strategic Plan concerned;
(c)
transmission to the Commission of the documents to be submitted in accordance with Article 9(3) and Article 12(2).
7.   If any of the requirements laid down in paragraph 6 is not met, the Commission shall forthwith inform the accredited paying agency, or the coordinating body where one has been designated. If any of the requirements laid down in paragraph 6, point (a) or point (c), is not fulfilled, the declaration of expenditure shall be deemed inadmissible.
8.   Without prejudice to Articles 53, 54 and 55, the Commission shall make interim payments within 45 days of registering a declaration of expenditure which meets the requirements laid down in paragraph 6 of this Article.
9.   Accredited paying agencies shall establish interim declarations of expenditure relating to CAP Strategic Plans and send these to the Commission, either directly or via the coordinating body, where one has been designated, within periods to be set by the Commission. The Commission shall adopt implementing acts laying down those periods. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 103(3).
Declarations of expenditure shall cover expenditure that the paying agencies have effected during each of the periods concerned. They shall also cover the amounts referred to in Article 94(2) of Regulation (EU) 2021/2115. However, if expenditure referred to in Article 86(3) of that Regulation cannot be declared to the Commission in the period concerned due to the pending approval by the Commission of an amendment to the CAP Strategic Plan in accordance with Article 119(10) of that Regulation, that expenditure may be declared in subsequent periods.
Interim declarations of expenditure in respect of expenditure effected from 16 October onwards shall be booked to the following year’s budget.
10.   Where the authorising officer by sub-delegation requires further verification owing to incomplete or unclear information provided or arising from disagreement, differences of interpretation or any other inconsistency relating to a declaration of expenditure for a reference period, arising in particular from a failure to communicate the information required under Regulation (EU) 2021/2115 and Commission acts adopted pursuant to that Regulation, the Member State concerned shall, upon request by the authorising officer by sub-delegation, provide additional information within a period set in that request according to the seriousness of the problem.
The time limit for interim payments laid down in paragraph 8 may be interrupted, for all or part of the amount for which payment is claimed, for a maximum period of six months from the date on which the request for information is sent until receipt of the information requested which is deemed satisfactory. The Member State may agree to extend the interruption period for a further period of three months.
Where the Member State concerned fails to respond to the request for additional information within the period set in that request or where the response is considered unsatisfactory or indicates that the applicable rules have not been complied with or that Union funds have been improperly used, the Commission may suspend or reduce payments in accordance with Articles 39 to 42.
