Article 49
Checks by the Commission
1.   Without prejudice to the checks carried out by Member States under national laws, regulations and administrative provisions or Article 287 TFEU, to any check organised under Article 322 TFEU or based on Regulation (Euratom, EC) No 2185/96, or to Article 127 of the Financial Regulation, the Commission may organise checks in Member States with a view to verifying in particular whether:
(a)
administrative practices comply with Union rules;
(b)
the expenditure falling within the scope of Article 5(2) and Article 6 of this Regulation and corresponding to the interventions referred to in Regulation (EU) 2021/2115 has a corresponding output as reported in the annual performance report;
(c)
the expenditure corresponding to the measures laid down in Regulations (EU) No 228/2013, (EU) No 229/2013, (EU) No 1308/2013 and (EU) No 1144/2014 has been effected and checked in accordance with applicable Union rules;
(d)
the work of the certification body is carried out in accordance with Article 12 and for the purposes of Section 2 of this Chapter;
(e)
a paying agency complies with the minimum conditions for the accreditation laid down in Article 9(2) and whether the Member State correctly applies Article 9(4);
(f)
the Member State concerned implements the CAP Strategic Plan in accordance with Article 9 of Regulation (EU) 2021/2115;
(g)
the action plans referred to in Article 42 are correctly implemented.
Persons authorised by the Commission to carry out checks on its behalf, or Commission agents acting within the scope of the powers conferred on them, shall have access to the books and all other documents, including documents and metadata drawn up or received and recorded on an electronic medium, relating to expenditure financed by the EAGF or the EAFRD.
The powers to carry out checks shall not affect the application of national provisions which reserve certain acts for agents specifically designated by national law. Without prejudice to the specific provisions of Regulation (Euratom, EC) No 2185/96 and Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 883/2013, persons authorised by the Commission to act on its behalf shall not take part, inter alia, in home visits or the formal questioning of persons on the basis of law of the Member State concerned. However, they shall have access to information thus obtained.
2.   The Commission shall give sufficient prior notice of a check to the Member State concerned or to the Member State within whose territory the check is to take place, taking into account the administrative impact on paying agencies when organising checks. Agents from the Member State concerned may take part in such checks.
At the request of the Commission and with the agreement of the Member State, additional checks or inquiries into the operations covered by this Regulation shall be undertaken by the competent bodies of that Member State. Commission agents or persons authorised by the Commission to act on its behalf may take part in such checks.
In order to improve checks, the Commission may, with the agreement of the Member States concerned, request the assistance of the authorities of those Member States for certain checks or inquiries.
