Article 65
Green public procurement
1.   Contracting authorities and contracting entities shall, in compliance with Directive 2014/24/EU or 2014/25/EU, award public contracts complying with the minimum requirements set out pursuant to paragraph 2 of this Article for the purchase of products covered by delegated acts adopted pursuant to Article 4, or for works or services where those products are used for activities constituting the subject matter of those contracts (‘minimum requirements’).
2.   The minimum requirements shall be set where appropriate, in order to incentivise the supply of and demand for environmentally sustainable products covered by delegated acts adopted pursuant to Article 4, taking into account the value and volume of public contracts awarded for the relevant product groups and the economic feasibility for contracting authorities and contracting entities to buy more environmentally sustainable products without entailing disproportionate costs.
3.   The Commission is empowered to set, by means of implementing acts, the minimum requirements in the form of technical specifications, award criteria, contract performance conditions or targets.
The minimum requirements shall be set in relation to the product aspects addressed in the delegated act adopted pursuant to Article 4 applicable to the product groups in question, as relevant for those product groups.
The minimum requirements shall be based on the two highest performance classes, the highest scores or, when not available, on the best possible performance levels as set out in the delegated act adopted pursuant to Article 4 applicable to the product groups in question.
Award criteria shall, where appropriate, have a minimum weighting of between 15 % and 30 % in the awarding process which enables them to have a significant impact on the outcome of the tendering procedure and which favours the selection of the most environmentally sustainable products.
Targets shall require, on an annual or multiannual basis, a minimum percentage of 50 % of procurement conducted at the level of contracting authorities or contracting entities, or at an aggregated national level, of the most environmentally sustainable products as referred to in the fourth subparagraph.
Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 73(3).
CHAPTER XI

MARKET SURVEILLANCE

