Article 30
Obligations of distributors
1.   When making a product covered by a delegated act adopted pursuant to Article 4 available on the market, distributors shall act with due care in relation to the requirements set out in the applicable delegated acts.
2.   Before making a product covered by a delegated act adopted pursuant to Article 4 available on the market, distributors shall verify that:
(a)
the product bears the CE marking in accordance with Articles 45 and 46 or the conformity marking adopted in accordance with Article 4(6), point (d), and, where relevant, is labelled or is linked to a digital product passport in accordance with that delegated act;
(b)
the product is accompanied by the required documents and by digital instructions in a language that can be easily understood by customers, as determined by the Member State concerned, and that such instructions are clear, understandable and legible and include at least the information set out in Article 7(2), point (b) (ii), as specified in the delegated act adopted pursuant to Article 4; the obligations laid down in Article 27(7), fourth and fifth subparagraphs, shall apply mutatis mutandis; and
(c)
the manufacturer and the importer have complied with the requirements set out in Article 27(5) and (6) and Article 29(3).
3.   Where distributors consider or have reason to believe that a product, before making it available on the market, is not in conformity, or its manufacturer is not complying, with the requirements set out in the applicable delegated acts adopted pursuant to Article 4, they shall not make the product available on the market until the product has been brought into conformity or the manufacturer complies.
Distributors shall ensure that, while a product is under their responsibility, storage or transport conditions do not jeopardise its compliance with the requirements set out in in the applicable delegated acts adopted pursuant to Article 4.
4.   Distributors that consider or have reason to believe that a product which they have made available on the market is not in conformity with the requirements set out in the applicable delegated acts adopted pursuant to Article 4 shall ensure that the necessary corrective action to bring that product into conformity, to withdraw or recall it, if appropriate, is taken.
Distributors shall immediately inform the market surveillance authorities of the Member States in which they made the product available of the suspected non-compliance and of any corrective action taken.
5.   Distributors shall, further to a reasoned request from a competent national authority, provide all the information and documentation to which they have access and that is necessary to demonstrate the conformity of a product. That information and documentation shall be provided in paper or electronic form, within 15 days of receipt of a request by that authority.
Distributors shall cooperate with the competent national authority regarding any corrective action taken to remedy any case of non-compliance with the applicable delegated act adopted pursuant to Article 4.
