Article 29
Obligations of importers
1.   Importers shall, with regard to products covered by a delegated act adopted pursuant to Article 4, only place on the market products that comply with the requirements set out in the applicable delegated acts.
2.   Before placing a product covered by a delegated act adopted pursuant to Article 4 on the market, importers shall ensure that:
(a)
the appropriate conformity assessment procedure has been carried out by the manufacturer and that the manufacturer has drawn up the technical documentation;
(b)
the product is accompanied by the information required under Article 7 and the delegated acts adopted pursuant to Article 4; and
(c)
a digital product passport is available in accordance with Article 9 and the delegated acts adopted pursuant to Article 4, including a back-up copy of the most up-to-date version of the digital product passport stored by a digital product passport service provider in accordance with Article 10(4).
The importer shall further ensure that a product covered by a delegated act adopted pursuant to Article 4 bears the required CE marking referred to in Article 45, where applicable, in accordance with the rules and conditions referred to in Article 46, or the alternative conformity marking as laid down in a delegated act adopted pursuant to Article 4(6), point (d), and is accompanied by the required documents, and that the manufacturer has complied with the requirements set out in Article 27(5) and (6).
Where importers consider or have reason to believe that a product is not in conformity with the requirements set out in the applicable delegated acts adopted pursuant to Article 4, they shall not place the product on the market or put it into service until it has been brought into conformity.
3.   For products covered by a delegated act adopted pursuant to Article 4, importers shall indicate their name, registered trade name or registered trade mark, postal address at which and electronic means of communication through which they can be contacted:
(a)
on the public part of the digital product passport, where applicable; and
(b)
on the product or, where that is not possible, on the packaging, or in a document accompanying the product.
The contact details shall be clear, understandable and legible.
4.   Importers shall ensure that a product covered by a delegated act adopted pursuant to Article 4 is accompanied by digital instructions in a language that can be easily understood, as determined by the Member State concerned. Such instructions shall be clear, understandable and legible and include at least the information set out in Article 7(2), point (b)(ii), as specified in the delegated acts adopted pursuant to Article 4. The obligations laid down in Article 27(7) fourth and fifth subparagraphs, shall apply mutatis mutandis.
5.   Importers shall ensure that, while a product is under their responsibility, storage or transport conditions do not jeopardise its compliance with the requirements set out in the applicable delegated act adopted pursuant to Article 4.
6.   Importers that consider or have reason to believe that a product covered by a delegated act adopted pursuant to Article 4 that they have placed on the market is not in conformity with the requirements set out in that delegated act shall without undue delay take the necessary corrective action to bring that product into conformity, or to immediately withdraw or recall it, if appropriate.
Importers shall immediately inform the market surveillance authorities of the Member States in which they made the product available of the suspected non-compliance and of any corrective action taken.
7.   Importers shall keep a copy of the EU declaration of conformity at the disposal of the market surveillance authorities and ensure that the technical documentation can be made available to those authorities, upon request, for 10 years after a product covered by a delegated act adopted pursuant to Article 4 has been placed on the market or put into service, unless a different period has been specified in that delegated act.
8.   Importers shall, for products covered by a delegated act adopted pursuant to Article 4, further to a reasoned request from a competent national authority, provide all the information and documentation necessary to demonstrate the conformity of those products, including the technical documentation, in a language that can be easily understood by that authority. That information and documentation shall be provided in paper or electronic form, as soon as possible and in any event within 15 days of receipt of a request by that authority.
Importers shall cooperate with the competent national authority regarding any corrective action taken to remedy any case of non-compliance with the requirements set out in the applicable delegated act adopted pursuant to Article 4.
