Article 61
Information obligation on notified bodies
1.   Notified bodies shall inform the notifying authority of the following:
(a)
any refusal, restriction, suspension or withdrawal of a certificate;
(b)
any circumstances affecting the scope of and conditions for notification;
(c)
any request for information which they have received from market surveillance authorities regarding conformity assessment activities;
(d)
on request, conformity assessment activities performed within the scope of their notification and any other activity performed, including cross-border activities and subcontracting.
2.   Notified bodies shall provide the other bodies notified under this Regulation which carry out similar conformity assessment activities that cover the same product group with relevant information on issues relating to negative and, on request, positive conformity assessment results.
3.   Where the Commission or a Member State’s market surveillance authority submits a request to a notified body established on the territory of another Member State relating to a conformity assessment carried out by that notified body, it shall send a copy of that request to the notifying authority of that other Member State. The notified body concerned shall respond without delay and within 15 days at the latest to the request. The notifying authority shall ensure that such requests are resolved by the notified body.
4.   Where notified bodies have or receive evidence as to the following, they shall alert, and share that evidence with, the relevant market surveillance authority or notifying authority, as appropriate:
(a)
that another notified body does not comply with the requirements laid down in Article 52 or its obligations;
(b)
that a product placed on the market does not comply with ecodesign requirements set out in the applicable delegated acts adopted pursuant to Article 4; or
(c)
that a product placed on the market, due to its physical condition, is likely to cause a serious risk.
