Article 75
Monitoring and evaluation
1.   Among the relevant preparatory documents for the update of the working plan in accordance with Article 18(3), the Commission shall compile a report on the ecodesign requirements with a view to monitoring the improvements of the environmental sustainability and circularity of the products covered by this Regulation.
2.   By 19 July 2030, and every six years thereafter, the Commission shall carry out an evaluation of this Regulation and of its contribution to the functioning of the internal market, including as regards the reuse and refurbishing sector, the vehicles referred to in Article 1(2), point (h), and the obligations laid down in Chapter VI, in particular the exemptions for small and microenterprises, and to the improvement of the environmental sustainability of products. As part of that evaluation, the Commission shall assess the feasibility of including automatic adaptation of ecodesign requirements on the basis of improvement of product performance in the products that are being placed on the market. The Commission shall present a report on the main findings of its evaluation to the European Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee, and the Committee of the Regions, and make it publicly available.
3.   Member States shall provide the Commission with the information necessary for the preparation of the reports referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2.
4.   By 19 July 2028, the Commission shall evaluate the potential benefits of the inclusion of social sustainability requirements within the scope of this Regulation. The Commission shall present a report on the main findings of its evaluation to the European Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee, and the Committee of the Regions, and make it publicly available.
5.   Where appropriate, the Commission shall accompany the reports referred to in paragraphs 2 and 4 with a legislative proposal for amendment of this Regulation.
