Article 42
Common specifications
1.   The Commission may adopt implementing acts establishing, for products covered by delegated acts adopted pursuant to Article 4, common specifications covering ecodesign requirements, the essential requirements for digital product passports referred to in Articles 10 and 11 or the test, measurement or calculation methods referred to in Article 39.
Those implementing acts shall only be adopted where the following conditions are fulfilled:
(a)
the Commission has requested, pursuant to Article 10(1) of Regulation (EU) No 1025/2012, one or more European standardisation organisations to draft a harmonised standard for an ecodesign requirement, for an essential requirement for digital product passports referred to in Articles 10 and 11 of this Regulation or for a test, measurement or calculation method referred to in Article 39 of this Regulation; and:
(i)
the request has not been accepted;
(ii)
the harmonised standard addressing that request is not delivered within the deadline set in accordance with Article 10(1) of Regulation (EU) No 1025/2012; or
(iii)
the harmonised standard does not comply with the request; and
(b)
no reference to harmonised standards for an ecodesign requirement, for an essential requirement for digital product passports referred to in Articles 10 and 11 of this Regulation or for a test, measurement or calculation method referred to in Article 39 of this Regulation is published in the Official Journal of the European Union in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 1025/2012 and no such reference is expected to be published within a reasonable period.
The implementing acts referred to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 73(3).
2.   Before preparing the draft of the implementing acts referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article, the Commission shall inform the committee referred to in Article 22 of Regulation (EU) No 1025/2012 that it considers that the conditions in paragraph 1 of this Article are fulfilled.
3.   When preparing the draft of the implementing acts referred to in paragraph 1, the Commission shall take into account the views of the Ecodesign Forum and of the Member States Expert Group as well as of any other relevant bodies, and shall duly consult all relevant stakeholders.
4.   Test, measurement and calculation methods referred to in Article 39 which are in conformity with common specifications established by implementing acts referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article or parts thereof shall be presumed to be in conformity with the requirements set out in that Article and with test, measurement and calculation requirements set out in delegated acts adopted pursuant to Article 4 to the extent that those requirements are covered by such common specification or parts thereof.
5.   Products within the scope of this Regulation which are in conformity with common specifications established by implementing acts referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article or parts thereof shall be presumed to be in conformity with ecodesign requirements, with the essential requirements for digital product passports referred to in Articles 10 and 11 or with the requirements for test, measurement or calculation methods referred to in Article 39 set out in the applicable delegated acts adopted pursuant to Article 4 to the extent that those requirements are covered by those common specifications or parts thereof.
6.   Where a harmonised standard is adopted by a European standardisation organisation and proposed to the Commission for the purpose of publishing its reference in the Official Journal of the European Union, the Commission shall assess the harmonised standard in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 1025/2012.
When references of a harmonised standard are published in the Official Journal of the European Union, the Commission shall repeal the implementing acts referred to in paragraph 1 or the parts thereof which cover the same ecodesign requirements, essential requirements for digital product passports and requirements for test, measurement or calculation methods.
7.   Where a Member State or the European Parliament considers that a common specification does not entirely satisfy the ecodesign requirements, the essential requirements for digital product passports and requirements for the test, measurement or calculation methods, it shall inform the Commission thereof by submitting a detailed explanation. The Commission shall assess that detailed explanation and, if appropriate, may amend the implementing act establishing the common specification in question.
