Article 16
Labels
1.   Where the information requirements indicate that information is to be included in a label pursuant to Article 7(7), point (c), the delegated acts adopted pursuant to Article 4 shall specify:
(a)
the content of the label;
(b)
the layout of the label, ensuring visibility and legibility;
(c)
the manner in which the label is to be displayed to customers including in the event of distance selling, taking into account the requirements set out in Article 32 and the implications for the relevant economic operators;
(d)
where appropriate, electronic means for generating labels.
2.   Where an information requirement entails the inclusion in a label of the class of performance, the layout of the label referred to in paragraph 1, point (b), shall be clear and easily understandable, and shall enable customers to easily compare product performance in relation to the relevant product parameter and to choose better performing products.
3.   For energy-related products that are subject to energy labels established pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2017/1369, where information on a relevant product parameter, including on classes of performance referred to in Article 7(4) of this Regulation, cannot be incorporated in the energy label, and provided such information is considered to be more relevant and comprehensive than the information covered by the energy label, the Commission, after assessing the risk of confusion for customers, the administrative burden for economic operators and the best way to communicate that particular information, may, if appropriate, require the establishment of a label in accordance with this Regulation instead of the energy label established pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2017/1369.
4.   When setting the information requirements referred to in paragraph 1, the Commission shall, where appropriate, require that the label include data carriers or other means to allow customers to access additional information on the product, including means allowing access to the digital product passport.
5.   The Commission shall adopt implementing acts establishing common requirements for the layout of the labels required pursuant to Article 7(7), point (c).
Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 73(3).
