Article 3
Free movement
1.   Products shall only be placed on the market or put into service if they comply with the ecodesign requirements applicable to those products, set out in the delegated acts adopted pursuant to Article 4.
2.   Member States shall not prohibit, restrict or impede the placing on the market or putting into service of products that comply with the performance requirements set out in delegated acts adopted pursuant to Article 4 for reasons of non-compliance with national performance requirements relating to product parameters referred to in Annex I covered by performance requirements included in such delegated acts.
Member States shall not prohibit, restrict or impede the placing on the market or putting into service of products that comply with the information requirements set out in delegated acts adopted pursuant to Article 4 for reasons of non-compliance with national information requirements relating to product parameters referred to in Annex I covered by information requirements included in such delegated acts.
3.   Notwithstanding paragraph 2 of this Article, Member States shall not be precluded from setting minimum energy performance requirements in accordance with Article 5 of Directive (EU) 2024/1275 and system requirements in accordance with Article 13 of that Directive.
4.   Member States shall not prohibit, restrict or impede the placing on the market or putting into service of products for which a delegated act adopted pursuant to Article 4(2) establishes that no performance requirements, no information requirements or neither performance nor information requirements are to be set for one or more specific product parameters referred to in Annex I, on the grounds of non-compliance with national requirements relating to such parameters.
5.   At trade fairs, exhibitions and similar events, Member States shall not prevent the showing of products that do not comply with requirements set in delegated acts adopted pursuant to Article 4, provided that a visible sign clearly indicates that such products do not comply with the requirements set in those delegated acts and that they are not for sale until they have been brought into conformity.
