Article 8
Policy windows
1.   The InvestEU Fund shall operate through the following four policy windows that shall address market failures or suboptimal investment situations within their specific scope:
(a)
a sustainable infrastructure policy window which comprises sustainable investment in the areas of transport, including multimodal transport, road safety, including in accordance with the Union objective of eliminating fatal road accidents and serious injuries by 2050, the renewal and maintenance of rail and road infrastructure, energy, in particular renewable energy, energy efficiency in accordance with the 2030 energy framework, buildings renovation projects focused on energy savings and the integration of buildings into a connected energy, storage, digital and transport systems, improving interconnection levels, digital connectivity and access, including in rural areas, supply and processing of raw materials, space, oceans, water, including inland waterways, waste management in accordance with the waste hierarchy and the circular economy, nature and other environment infrastructure, cultural heritage, tourism, equipment, mobile assets and the deployment of innovative technologies that contribute to the environmental or climate resilience or social sustainability objectives of the Union and that meet the environmental or social sustainability standards of the Union;
(b)
a research, innovation and digitisation policy window which comprises research, product development and innovation activities, the transfer of technologies and research results to the market to support market enablers and cooperation between enterprises, the demonstration and deployment of innovative solutions and support for the scaling up of innovative companies, as well as digitisation of Union industry;
(c)
an SME policy window which comprises access to and the availability of finance primarily for SMEs, including for innovative SMEs and SMEs operating in the cultural and creative sectors, as well as for small mid-cap companies;
(d)
a social investment and skills policy window, which comprises microfinance, social enterprise finance, social economy and measures to promote gender equality, skills, education, training and related services, social infrastructure, including health and educational infrastructure and social and student housing, social innovation, health and long-term care, inclusion and accessibility, cultural and creative activities with a social goal, and the integration of vulnerable people, including third country nationals.
2.   A just transition scheme shall be established horizontally across all policy windows. That scheme shall comprise investments that address social, economic and environmental challenges deriving from the transition process towards the achievement of the Union’s 2030 climate target and its target of achieving climate neutrality by 2050, as well as benefit territories identified in a just transition plan prepared by a Member State in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Just Transition Fund Regulation.
3.   All policy windows may include strategic investments including important projects of common European interest to support final recipients whose activities are of strategic importance to the Union, in particular in view of the green and digital transitions, of enhanced resilience and of strengthening strategic value chains.
In the case of strategic investments in defence and space sectors and in cybersecurity, as well as in specific types of projects with actual and direct security implications in critical sectors, the investment guidelines adopted in accordance with paragraph 9 of this Article (the ‘investment guidelines’) shall set out limitations with respect to final recipients controlled by a third country or third country entities and final recipients having their executive management outside the Union with a view to protecting the security of the Union and its Member States. Those limitations shall be set out in line with the principles concerning eligible entities set out in the relevant provisions of a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing the European Defence Fund and repealing Regulation (EU) 2018/1092 and in the relevant provisions of a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing the Union Space Programme and the European Union Agency for the Space Programme and repealing Regulations (EU) No 912/2010, (EU) No 1285/2013, (EU) No 377/2014 and Decision No 541/2014/EU.
The investment guidelines shall set out any necessary requirements relating to the control and executive management of final recipients for other areas, and to the control of intermediaries, in the light of any applicable public order or security considerations. Taking account of those requirements, the Steering Board shall set out any necessary additional requirements.
4.   Where a financing or investment operation proposed to the Investment Committee falls under more than one policy window, it shall be attributed to the policy window under which its main objective or the main objective of most of its sub-projects falls, unless the investment guidelines provide otherwise.
5.   Financing and investment operations shall be screened to determine whether they have an environmental, climate or social impact. If those operations have such an impact they shall be subject to climate, environmental and social sustainability proofing with a view to minimising detrimental impacts and to maximising benefits to the climate, environment and social dimensions. For that purpose, project promoters that request financing shall provide adequate information based on the guidance referred to in paragraph 6. Projects below a certain size specified in the guidance shall be excluded from the proofing. Projects that are inconsistent with the climate objectives shall not be eligible for support under this Regulation. In the event that the implementing partner concludes that no sustainability proofing is to be carried out, it shall provide a justification to the Investment Committee.
6.   The Commission shall develop sustainability guidance that, in accordance with Union environmental and social objectives and standards and, taking appropriate account of the principle of ‘do no significant harm’ allows for:
(a)
as regards adaptation, ensuring resilience to the potential adverse impacts of climate change through a climate vulnerability and risk assessment, including through relevant adaptation measures, and, as regards mitigation, integrating the cost of greenhouse gas emissions and the positive effects of climate mitigation measures in the cost-benefit analysis;
(b)
accounting for the consolidated impact of projects in terms of the principal components of natural capital, namely air, water, land and biodiversity;
(c)
estimating the social impact of projects, including on gender equality, on the social inclusion of certain areas or populations and on the economic development of areas and sectors affected by structural challenges such as the need to decarbonise the economy;
(d)
identifying projects that are inconsistent with the achievement of climate objectives;
(e)
providing implementing partners with guidance for the purpose of the screening provided for under paragraph 5.
7.   Implementing partners shall provide the information necessary to allow the tracking of investment that contributes to meeting the Union objectives on climate and environment, on the basis of guidance to be provided by the Commission.
8.   Implementing partners shall apply a target of at least 60 % of the investment under the sustainable infrastructure policy window contributing to meeting the Union objectives on climate and environment.
The Commission, together with implementing partners, shall seek to ensure that the part of the EU guarantee used for the sustainable infrastructure policy window is distributed with the aim of achieving a balance between the different areas referred to in point (a) of paragraph 1.
9.   The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 34 in order to supplement this Regulation by defining the investment guidelines for each of the policy windows. The investment guidelines shall also set out the arrangements for the implementation of the just transition scheme, as referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article. The investment guidelines shall be prepared in close dialogue with the EIB Group and other potential implementing partners.
10.   For strategic financing and investment operations in defence and space sectors and in cybersecurity, the investment guidelines may set out limitations with respect to transfer and licensing of intellectual property rights to critical technologies and technologies instrumental to safeguarding the security of the Union and its Member States while respecting Member State competence within export control.
11.   The Commission shall make the information on the application and interpretation of the investment guidelines available to the implementing partners, the Investment Committee and the advisory partners.
