Article 13
EU guarantee
1.   The EU guarantee shall be granted as an irrevocable, unconditional and on demand guarantee to the implementing partners in accordance with Article 219(1) of the Financial Regulation and implemented in indirect management in accordance with Title X of that Regulation.
2.   The remuneration for the EU guarantee shall be linked to the characteristics and risk profile of the financial products, taking into account the nature of the underlying financing and investment operations and the fulfilment of the policy objectives targeted by the financial products.
Where duly justified by the nature of the policy objectives targeted by the financial product and the need for the financial products to be affordable to the targeted final recipients, the cost of the financing provided to the final recipient may be reduced or the terms of that financing may be improved, by reducing the remuneration for the EU guarantee, or, where necessary, by covering the outstanding administrative costs borne by the implementing partner through the Union budget, in particular:
(a)
where stressed financial market conditions would prevent the realisation of a financing or investment operation under market-based pricing; or
(b)
where necessary to catalyse financing and investment operations in sectors or areas experiencing a significant market failure or suboptimal investment situation or to facilitate the establishment of investment platforms.
The reduction of the remuneration for the EU guarantee or the coverage of the outstanding administrative costs borne by the implementing partner, referred to in the second subparagraph, may only be done to the extent that it does not significantly impact the provisioning for the EU guarantee.
The reduction of the remuneration for the EU guarantee shall fully benefit final recipients.
3.   The condition set out in Article 219(4) of the Financial Regulation shall apply to each implementing partner on a portfolio basis.
4.   75 % of the EU guarantee under the EU compartment as referred to in the first subparagraph of Article 4(1), amounting to EUR 19 614 232 554, shall be granted to the EIB Group. The EIB Group shall provide an aggregate financial contribution amounting to EUR 4 903 558 139. That contribution shall be provided in a manner and form that facilitates the implementation of the InvestEU Fund and the achievement of the objectives set out in Article 15(2).
5.   The remaining 25 % of the EU guarantee under the EU compartment shall be granted to other implementing partners, which shall also provide a financial contribution to be determined in the guarantee agreements.
6.   Best efforts shall be made to ensure that, at the end of the investment period, a wide range of sectors and regions are covered and excessive sectoral or geographical concentration is avoided. Those efforts shall include incentives for smaller or less sophisticated national promotional banks and institutions that have a comparative advantage due to their local presence, knowledge and investment competencies. The Commission shall develop a coherent approach to support those efforts.
7.   Support under the EU guarantee referred to in the first subparagraph of Article 4(2) of this Regulation shall be granted under the conditions set out in Article 3(6) of Regulation (EU) 2020/2094. In other cases, support under the EU guarantee may be granted for financing and investment operations covered by this Regulation for an investment period ending on 31 December 2027.
Contracts between the implementing partner and the final recipient or the financial intermediary or other entity referred to in point (a) of Article 16(1) under the EU guarantee referred to in the first subparagraph of Article 4(2) shall be signed at the latest one year after the approval of the relevant financing or investment operation by the implementing partner. In other cases, contracts between the implementing partner and the final recipient or the financial intermediary or other entity referred to in point (a) of Article 16(1) shall be signed by 31 December 2028.
