Article 21
Steering Board
1.   A steering board for the InvestEU Programme (the ‘Steering Board’) shall be established. It shall be composed of four representatives of the Commission, three representatives of the EIB Group and two representatives of the implementing partners other than the EIB Group and one expert appointed as a non-voting member by the European Parliament. The expert appointed as a non-voting member by the European Parliament shall not seek or take instructions from Union institutions, bodies, offices or agencies, from any Member State government or from any other public or private body and shall act with full independence. That expert shall perform his or her duties impartially and in the interest of the InvestEU Programme.
Members of the Steering Board shall be appointed for a term of four years, renewable once, with the exception of the representatives of the implementing partners other than the EIB Group, who shall be appointed for a term of two years.
2.   The Steering Board shall select a Chairperson from among the Commission representatives for a term of four years, renewable once. The Chairperson shall report biannually to the representatives of the Member States on the Advisory Board on the implementation and operation of the InvestEU Programme.
Detailed minutes of Steering Board meetings shall be published as soon as they have been approved by the Steering Board.
3.   The Steering Board shall:
(a)
provide strategic and operational guidance for the implementing partners, including guidance on the design of financial products and on other operating policies and procedures necessary for the operation of the InvestEU Fund;
(b)
adopt the risk methodological framework developed by the Commission in cooperation with the EIB Group and the other implementing partners;
(c)
oversee the implementation of the InvestEU Programme;
(d)
be consulted, reflecting the views of all its member, on the shortlist of candidates for the Investment Committee before their selection in accordance with Article 24(2);
(e)
adopt the rules of procedure of the secretariat to the Investment Committee referred to in Article 24(4).
(f)
adopt the rules applicable to the operations with investment platforms.
4.   The Steering Board shall use a consensual approach in its discussions, therefore taking the utmost possible account of the positions of all members. If the members cannot converge in their positions, decisions of the Steering Board are taken by qualified majority of its voting members, consisting of at least seven votes.
