Article 29
Evaluation
1.   Evaluations of the InvestEU Programme shall be carried out so that they feed into the decision-making process in a timely manner.
2.   By 30 September 2024, the Commission shall submit to the European Parliament and to the Council an independent interim evaluation report on the InvestEU Programme, in particular on the use of the EU guarantee, on the fulfilment of the EIB Group’s obligations under points (b) and (c) of the first subparagraph of Article 11(1), on the allocation of the EU guarantee provided for in Article 13(4) and (5), on the implementation of the InvestEU Advisory Hub, on the budgetary allocation provided for in point (d)(i) of the first subparagraph of Article 11(1), and on Article 8(8). The evaluation shall in particular demonstrate how the inclusion of the implementing partners and advisory partners in the implementation of the InvestEU Programme has contributed to the reaching of InvestEU Programme targets as well as EU policy goals, especially with regard to added value and the geographical and sectoral balance of the supported financing and investment operations. The evaluation shall also assess the application of sustainability proofing pursuant to Article 8(5) and the focus on SMEs reached under the SME policy window referred to in point (c) of Article 8(1).
3.   At the end of the implementation of the InvestEU Programme, but no later than 31 December 2031, the Commission shall submit to the European Parliament and to the Council an independent final evaluation report on the InvestEU Programme, in particular on the use of the EU guarantee.
4.   The Commission shall communicate the conclusions of the evaluations, accompanied by its observations, to the European Parliament, to the Council, to the European Economic and Social Committee and to the Committee of the Regions.
5.   The implementing partners and advisory partners shall contribute to and provide the Commission with the information necessary to perform the evaluations referred to in paragraphs 2 and 3.
6.   In accordance with Article 211(1) of the Financial Regulation, every three years the Commission shall include in the annual report referred to in Article 250 of the Financial Regulation a review of the adequacy of the provisioning rate laid down in Article 4(1) of this Regulation with respect to the actual risk profile of the financing and investment operations covered by the EU guarantee. The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 34 of this Regulation in order to amend this Regulation by adjusting the provisioning rate laid down in Article 4(1) of this Regulation by up to 15 % on the basis of that review.
