Article 19
Coverage and terms of the EU guarantee
1.   Remuneration for risk-taking shall be allocated between the Union and an implementing partner in proportion to their respective share of the risk-taking with respect to a portfolio of financing and investment operations or, where relevant, with respect to individual financing and investment operations. The remuneration for the EU guarantee may be reduced in duly justified cases referred to in Article 13(2).
The implementing partner shall have appropriate exposure at its own risk to financing and investment operations supported by the EU guarantee, unless exceptionally the policy objectives targeted by the financial product to be implemented are of such nature that the implementing partner could not reasonably contribute its own risk-bearing capacity to it.
2.   The EU guarantee shall cover:
(a)
for debt products referred to in point (a) of Article 16(1):
(i)
the principal and all interest and amounts due to the implementing partner but not received by it in accordance with the terms of the financing operations prior to the event of default;
(ii)
restructuring losses;
(iii)
losses arising from fluctuations of currencies other than the euro in markets where possibilities for long-term hedging are limited;
(b)
for equity or quasi-equity investments referred to in point (a) of Article 16(1): the amounts invested and the associated funding costs and losses arising from fluctuations of currencies other than the euro;
(c)
for funding or guarantees by an implementing partner to another financial institution in accordance with point (b) of Article 16(1): the amounts used and their associated funding costs.
For the purposes of point (a)(i) of the first subparagraph, for subordinated debt a deferral, reduction or required exit shall be considered to be an event of default.
3.   Where the Union makes a payment to the implementing partner as the result of a call on the EU guarantee, the Union shall be subrogated into the relevant rights of the implementing partner relating to any of its financing or investment operations covered by the EU guarantee, to the extent that those rights continue to exist.
The implementing partner shall pursue the recovery of claims for the subrogated amounts on behalf of the Union and shall reimburse the Union from the amounts recovered.
