Article 17
Guarantee agreements
1.   The Commission shall conclude a guarantee agreement with each implementing partner on the granting of the EU guarantee up to an amount to be determined by the Commission.
In the event that implementing partners form a group, a single guarantee agreement shall be concluded between the Commission and each implementing partner within the group or with one implementing partner on behalf of the group.
2.   The guarantee agreement shall contain:
(a)
the amount and the terms of the financial contribution which is to be provided by the implementing partner;
(b)
the terms of the funding or the guarantees which are to be provided by the implementing partner to another legal entity participating in the implementation, whenever that is the case;
(c)
detailed rules on the provision of the EU guarantee in accordance with Article 19, including on the coverage of portfolios of specific types of instruments and the respective events that trigger possible calls on the EU guarantee;
(d)
the remuneration for risk-taking that is to be allocated in proportion to the respective share of the risk-taking of the Union and of the implementing partner or as reduced in duly justified cases pursuant to Article 13(2);
(e)
the payment conditions;
(f)
the commitment of the implementing partner to accept the decisions by the Commission and the Investment Committee as regards the use of the EU guarantee for the benefit of a proposed financing or investment operation, without prejudice to the decision-making of the implementing partner in respect of the proposed financing or investment operation without the EU guarantee;
(g)
provisions and procedures relating to the recovery of claims that is to be entrusted to the implementing partner;
(h)
financial and operational reporting and monitoring of the financing and investment operations under the EU guarantee;
(i)
key performance indicators, in particular as regards the use of the EU guarantee, the fulfilment of the objectives and criteria laid down in Articles 3, 8 and 14, and the mobilisation of private capital;
(j)
where applicable, provisions and procedures relating to blending operations;
(k)
other relevant provisions in compliance with the requirements of Article 155(2) and Title X of the Financial Regulation;
(l)
the existence of adequate mechanisms for addressing the potential concerns of private investors.
3.   A guarantee agreement shall also provide that remuneration attributable to the Union from financing and investment operations covered by this Regulation is to be provided after the deduction of payments due upon calls on the EU guarantee.
4.   In addition, a guarantee agreement shall provide that any amount due to the implementing partner that relates to the EU guarantee shall be deducted from the overall amount of remuneration, revenues and repayments due by the implementing partner to the Union from financing and investment operations covered by this Regulation. Where that amount is not sufficient to cover the amount due to the implementing partner in accordance with Article 18(3), the outstanding amount shall be drawn from the provisioning for the EU guarantee.
5.   Where the guarantee agreement is concluded under the Member State compartment, it may provide for the participation of representatives from the Member State or the regions concerned in the monitoring of the implementation of that guarantee agreement.
