Article 35
Exemptions for new technologies or new concepts
1.   A manufacturer may apply for an EU type-approval in respect of an engine type or engine family that incorporates new technologies or new concepts and that, as a result of those new technologies or new concepts, is incompatible with one or more requirements of this Regulation.
2.   The approval authority shall grant the EU type-approval referred to in paragraph 1 where all of the following conditions are met:
(a)
the application states the reasons why the new technologies or new concepts make the engine type or engine family incompatible with one or more of the requirements of this Regulation;
(b)
the application describes the environmental implications of the new technologies or new concepts and the measures taken in order to ensure a level of environmental protection that is at least equivalent to the level provided by the requirements of this Regulation from which exemption is sought;
(c)
test descriptions and results are presented which prove that the condition in point (b) is met.
3.   The granting of the EU type-approval referred to in paragraph 1 shall be subject to authorisation by the Commission.
Where appropriate, the authorisation by the Commission shall specify whether it is subject to any restrictions.
The authorisation shall be given by means of an implementing act.
4.   Pending the decision on authorisation by the Commission pursuant to paragraph 3, the approval authority may issue a provisional EU type-approval which shall be valid:
(a)
only in the territory of that Member State;
(b)
only in respect of an engine type or engine family covered by the exemption sought; and
(c)
for at least 36 months.
Where a provisional EU type-approval is issued, the approval authority shall inform the Commission and the other Member States thereof without delay, by means of a file containing the information referred to in paragraph 2.
The provisional nature and the limited territorial validity of such a provisional EU type-approval shall be apparent from the heading of the EU type-approval certificate and the heading of the corresponding statement of conformity.
5.   Where an approval authority decides to accept a provisional EU type-approval referred to in paragraph 4 within its territory, it shall inform the relevant approval authority and the Commission thereof in writing.
6.   Where the Commission decides not to give the authorisation referred to in paragraph 3 the approval authority shall immediately notify the holder of the provisional EU type-approval referred to in paragraph 4 that the provisional EU type-approval will be revoked six months after the date of the Commission's refusal.
Notwithstanding the Commission's decision not to give the authorisation referred to in paragraph 3, engines manufactured in conformity with the provisional EU type-approval before it ceases to be valid may be placed on the market in any Member State the approval authorities of which accepted the provisional EU type-approval.
7.   The requirements referred to in the second subparagraph of paragraph 4 and in paragraph 5 shall be deemed to be fulfilled where the relevant information has been uploaded onto IMI.
8.   The Commission may adopt implementing acts laying down the authorisation referred to in paragraph 3 of this Article. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 56(2).
9.   The Commission may adopt implementing acts laying down the harmonised templates for the EU type-approval certificate and the statement of conformity referred to in paragraph 4 of this Article, including their mandatory essential information. Those implementing acts shall be adopted, by 31 December 2016, in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 56(2).
