Article 45
Requirements relating to technical services
1.   A technical service shall be designated by an approval authority in accordance with Article 47 and shall fulfil the requirements laid down in paragraphs 2 to 9 of this Article.
2.   A technical service shall be established under the national law of a Member State and have legal personality.
3.   The technical service shall be a third-party body independent of the process of design, manufacture, supply or maintenance of the engines it assesses.
A body belonging to a business association or professional federation representing undertakings involved in the design, manufacture, provision, assembly, installation, use or maintenance of the engines it assesses, tests or inspects may, provided that it demonstrates its independence and the absence of any conflict of interest, be considered to fulfil the requirements of the first subparagraph.
4.   The technical service, including its top-level management and the personnel responsible for carrying out the categories of activities for which the technical service is designated in accordance with Article 47(1), shall not be the designer, manufacturer, supplier, installer or maintainer of the engines which it assesses, and shall not represent parties engaged in those activities. This restriction shall not preclude the use of assessed engines referred to in paragraph 3 of this Article that are necessary for the operation of the technical service, or the use of such engines for personal purposes.
The technical service shall ensure that the activities of its subsidiaries or subcontractors do not affect its confidentiality, objectivity or impartiality in relation to the categories of activities for which it has been designated.
5.   The technical service shall carry out the categories of activities for which it has been designated with the highest degree of professional integrity and the requisite technical competence in the specific field, and its personnel shall be free from any pressure or inducements, particularly financial, which might influence its judgment or the results of its assessment activities, especially such pressure or inducements emanating from persons or groups of persons with an interest in the results of those activities.
6.   The technical service shall demonstrate to its designating approval authority that it is capable of carrying out all the categories of activities for which it is seeking to be designated in accordance with Article 47(1), by ensuring that it has:
(a)
personnel with appropriate skills and specific technical knowledge and vocational training as well as sufficient and appropriate experience to perform the task;
(b)
descriptions of the procedures relevant to the categories of activities for which it is seeking to be designated, thereby ensuring the transparency and reproducibility of those procedures;
(c)
procedures for the performance of the categories of activities for which it is seeking to be designated, which take due account of the degree of complexity of the technology of the engine in question and of whether the engine is manufactured pursuant to a mass or serial production process; and
(d)
the means necessary to perform in an appropriate manner the tasks connected with the categories of activities for which it is seeking to be designated and that it has access to all the necessary equipment or facilities.
7.   The technical service, including its top-level management and the assessment personnel, shall be impartial and shall not engage in any activity that could conflict with their independence of judgment or integrity in relation to the categories of activities for which the technical service is designated.
8.   The technical service shall take out liability insurance covering its activities, unless liability is assumed by the Member State in accordance with national law or the Member State is itself directly responsible for the assessment.
9.   The personnel of a technical service shall be bound by professional secrecy with regard to all information obtained in carrying out their tasks under this Regulation or any provision of national law giving effect to it.
The personnel of a technical service shall not be bound by the obligation referred to in the first subparagraph in respect of the sharing of information with the designating approval authority, or where such sharing is required by Union or national law.
Proprietary rights shall be protected.
