Article 60
Review
1.   By 31 December 2018, the Commission shall submit a report to the European Parliament and to the Council regarding the assessment of the possibility of laying down harmonised measures for the installation of retrofit emission control devices in engines in non-road mobile machinery that has already been placed on the Union market. That report shall also address technical measures and financial incentive schemes as a means of helping Member States to comply with Union air quality legislation, by assessing possible action against air pollution in densely populated areas, and with due respect for the Union rules on state aid.
2.   By 31 December 2020, the Commission shall submit a report to the European Parliament and to the Council regarding:
(a)
the assessment of further pollutant emission reduction potential, on the basis of available technologies and a cost-benefit analysis.
In particular, for engines of categories IWP and IWA, the assessment of the technological and economic feasibility of:
(i)
a further reduction in the emission limit value for PN and NOx emissions;
(ii)
a further reduction in the A-factor for fully and partially gaseous-fuelled engines in the framework of a climate-neutral operation compared to diesel-fuelled engines; and
(iii)
the addition of PN limit values to those engine categories for which such values have not been set out in Annex II to this Regulation;
(b)
the identification of potentially relevant pollutant types that do not fall within the scope of this Regulation.
3.   By 31 December 2025, the Commission shall submit a report to the European Parliament and to the Council regarding the use of the exemption clauses provided for in Article 34(4) and (5), and the monitoring of the results of the emission tests set out in Article 19 and the conclusions thereof.
In addition, the report shall evaluate the tests required for EU type-approval as set out in Articles 24 and 25, with a particular focus on the extent to which those tests correspond to real engine operation conditions, and it shall also evaluate the feasibility of introducing tests for particulate pollutant emissions as part of the in-service testing set out in Article 19.
4.   The reports referred to in paragraphs 2 and 3 shall:
(a)
be based on consultation with the relevant stakeholders;
(b)
take into account existing related Union and international standards; and
(c)
be accompanied, where appropriate, by legislative proposals.
