Article 31
Statement of conformity
1.   The manufacturer, in its capacity as the holder of an engine type or engine family EU type-approval, shall deliver a statement of conformity (‘statement of conformity’) to accompany engines which are placed on the market, on the basis of:
(a)
an exemption referred to in Article 34(2), (4), (5), (6), (7) or (8), Article 35(4); or
(b)
a transitional provision referred to in Article 58(9), (10) or (11).
The statement of conformity shall specify the particular features and restrictions that are to apply to the engine, shall be delivered free of charge together with the engine and shall, where applicable, accompany the non-road mobile machine in which the engine is installed. Its delivery shall not be made dependent on an explicit request or on the submission of additional information to the manufacturer. The statement of conformity may also be delivered in the form of a secure electronic file.
For a period of 10 years after the engine production date, the manufacturer shall, at the request of the end-user, issue a duplicate of the statement of conformity in return for payment of an amount not exceeding the cost of issuing it. The word ‘duplicate’ shall be clearly visible on any such duplicate statement of conformity.
2.   The statement of conformity shall be drawn up in at least one of the official languages of the institutions of the Union.
Any Member State may request from the manufacturer that the statement of conformity be translated into its official language or languages.
3.   The person(s) authorised to sign statements of conformity shall belong to the manufacturer's organisation and shall be duly authorised by the management of that organisation to fully engage the legal responsibility of the manufacturer with respect to the design and construction, or with respect to the conformity of production, of the engine.
4.   The statement of conformity shall be completed in its entirety and shall not contain any restrictions as regards the use of the engine other than those provided for in this Regulation.
5.   The Commission may adopt implementing acts laying down the template for the statement of conformity, including the features aimed at preventing forgery and allowing verification of the secure electronic file. To that end, the implementing acts shall provide the security features used for protecting the statement of conformity. Those implementing acts shall be adopted, by 31 December 2016, in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 56(2).
