Article 53
Operational obligations of technical services
1.   Technical services shall carry out the categories of activities for which they have been designated on behalf of the designating approval authority and in accordance with the assessment and test procedures provided for in this Regulation and its delegated and implementing acts.
Technical services shall supervise or shall themselves carry out the tests required for EU type-approval or inspections as set out in this Regulation or in one of its delegated or implementing acts, unless alternative procedures are permitted.
Technical services shall not conduct tests, assessments or inspections for which they have not been designated.
2.   Technical services shall at all times:
(a)
allow the designating approval authority to observe them conducting their assessments, if deemed appropriate by that authority; and
(b)
without prejudice to Article 45(9) and Article 54, provide the designating approval authority with such information as may be requested on the categories of activities which they carry out and which fall within the scope of this Regulation.
3.   Where a technical service finds that the requirements laid down in this Regulation have not been fulfilled by a manufacturer, it shall report that fact to the designating approval authority, which shall, in turn, require the manufacturer to take appropriate corrective measures.
The designating approval authority shall not issue an EU type-approval certificate until the manufacturer has taken the appropriate corrective measures to the satisfaction of that approval authority.
4.   Where, in the course of monitoring conformity of production following the issue of an EU type-approval certificate, a technical service acting on behalf of the designating approval authority finds that an engine type or engine family no longer complies with this Regulation, it shall report that fact to the designating approval authority.
The approval authority shall take the appropriate measures as provided for in Article 26.
