Article 24
Tests required for EU type-approval
1.   Compliance with the technical prescriptions laid down in this Regulation shall be demonstrated by means of appropriate tests performed by designated technical services. The measurement and test procedures and the specific equipment and tools for the conduct of those tests shall be those laid down in Article 25.
2.   The manufacturer shall make available to the approval authority as many engines as are required under the relevant delegated acts for the performance of the required tests.
3.   The required tests shall be conducted on engines that are representative of the engine type or, where applicable, of the parent engine of the engine family to be approved.
Notwithstanding the first subparagraph, the manufacturer may, in agreement with the approval authority, select an engine which, although not representative of the engine type or, where applicable, of the parent engine of the engine family to be approved, combines a number of the most unfavourable features with regard to the required level of performance. Virtual testing methods may be used to aid decision-making during the selection process.
4.   For the purposes of conducting the EU type-approval tests, the applicable test cycles are those set out in Annex IV. The test cycles applicable to each engine type included in the EU type-approval shall be indicated in the information document.
5.   An engine that is representative of the engine type or, where applicable, of the parent engine of the engine family, or an engine selected in accordance with the second subparagraph of paragraph 3, shall be tested on a dynamometer using the applicable non-road steady-state test cycle identified in Tables IV-1 to IV-10 of Annex IV. The manufacturer may choose whether to conduct that test using the discrete-mode or the ramped-modal test method. Except in the cases referred to in paragraphs 7 and 8, a variable-speed engine of a particular category used in a constant-speed operation of the same category need not be tested using the applicable constant-speed steady-state test cycle.
6.   In the case of a constant-speed engine with a governor that can be set to an alternative speed, the requirements of paragraph 5 shall be fulfilled at each applicable constant speed and the information document shall indicate the speeds that apply for each engine type.
7.   In the case of an engine of category IWP intended to be used for both variable-speed and constant-speed operation, the requirements of paragraph 5 shall be fulfilled for each applicable steady-state test cycle separately and the information document shall indicate each steady-state test cycle in respect of which those requirements were fulfilled.
8.   In the case of an engine of category IWP that is intended for use in the place of an engine of category IWA in accordance with Article 4(2), the requirements of paragraph 5 of this Article shall be fulfilled for each applicable steady-state test cycle set out in Tables IV-5 and IV-6 of Annex IV, and the information document shall indicate each steady-state test cycle in respect of which those requirements were fulfilled.
9.   Except for engines type-approved pursuant to Article 34(5) and (6), variable-speed engines of category NRE having a net power that is greater than or equal to 19 kW but not more than 560 kW shall, in addition to fulfilling the requirements of paragraph 5 of this Article, also be tested on a dynamometer using the transient test cycle identified in Table IV-11 of Annex IV.
10.   Engines of sub-categories NRS-v-2b and NRS-v-3 having a maximum speed of less than or equal to 3 400 rpm shall, in addition to fulfilling the requirements of paragraph 5, also be tested on a dynamometer using the transient test cycle identified in Table IV-12 of Annex IV.
11.   The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 55 supplementing this Regulation by laying down the detailed technical specifications and characteristics of the steady-state and transient test cycles referred to in this Article, including the corresponding method for the determination of the engine load and speed settings. Those delegated acts shall be adopted by 31 December 2016.
12.   The Commission may adopt implementing acts laying down the single format of the test report required for EU type-approval. Those implementing acts shall be adopted, by 31 December 2016, in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 56(2).
