Article 26
Conformity of production arrangements
1.   An approval authority which has granted an EU type-approval shall take the necessary measures in relation to that EU type-approval to verify, if necessary in cooperation with the approval authorities of the other Member States, that adequate arrangements have been made to ensure that the engines in production will be in conformity with the approved type with respect to the requirements of this Regulation.
2.   An approval authority which has granted an EU type-approval shall take the necessary measures in relation to that EU type-approval to verify that statements of conformity issued by the manufacturer comply with Article 31.
3.   An approval authority which has granted an EU type-approval shall take the necessary measures in relation to that EU type-approval to verify, if necessary in cooperation with the approval authorities of the other Member States, that the arrangements referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article continue to be adequate in that engines in production will continue to be in conformity with the approved type and that statements of conformity, where applicable, will continue to comply with Article 31.
4.   In order to verify the conformity of an engine with the approved type, the approval authority which has granted the EU type-approval may carry out any of the checks or tests required for the EU type-approval on samples taken at the premises of the manufacturer, including at the manufacturer's production facilities.
5.   Where an approval authority which has granted an EU type-approval establishes that the arrangements referred to in paragraph 1 are not being applied, deviate significantly from the arrangements agreed as referred to in paragraph 1, have ceased to be applied or are no longer considered to be adequate, even though production is continuing, it shall either take the necessary measures to ensure that the procedure for conformity of production is followed correctly, or shall withdraw the EU type-approval.
6.   The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 55 supplementing this Regulation by laying down the detailed measures to be taken and procedures to be followed by the approval authorities to ensure that the engines in production are in conformity with the approved type. Those delegated acts shall be adopted by 31 December 2016.
