Article 4
Framework for assistance
1.   Assistance under this Regulation shall be provided in accordance with the enlargement policy framework defined by the European Council and the Council and shall take due account of the Communication on the Enlargement Strategy and the Progress Reports comprised in the annual enlargement package of the Commission, as well as of the relevant resolutions of the European Parliament. The Commission shall ensure coherence between the assistance and the enlargement policy framework.
2.   Assistance shall be targeted and adjusted to the specific situation of the beneficiaries listed in Annex I, taking into account further efforts needed to meet the membership criteria as well as the capacities of those beneficiaries. Assistance shall be differentiated in scope and intensity according to needs, commitment to reforms and progress in implementing those reforms. It shall mainly be directed towards helping the beneficiaries listed in Annex I to design and implement sector reforms. Sector policies and strategies shall be comprehensive and shall contribute to the attainment of the specific objectives set out in Article 2(1).
3.   In accordance with the specific objectives set out in Article 2(1), the thematic priorities for providing assistance according to the needs and capacities of the beneficiaries listed in Annex I are set out in Annex II. Each of those thematic priorities may contribute to the attainment of more than one specific objective.
4.   In accordance with the specific objective set out in point (d) of Article 2(1), assistance shall support cross-border cooperation, both between the beneficiaries listed in Annex I and between them and Member States or countries under the European Neighbourhood Instrument (the ‘ENI’) established by Regulation (EU) No 232/2014, with a view to promoting good neighbourly relations, fostering Union integration and promoting socio-economic development. The thematic priorities for assistance for territorial cooperation are set out in Annex III.
