Article 5
Compliance, coherence and complementarity
1.   Financial assistance under this Regulation shall be consistent with Union policies. It shall comply with the agreements concluded by the Union with the beneficiaries listed in Annex I and shall respect commitments under multilateral agreements to which the Union is a party.
2.   The Commission, in liaison with Member States, shall contribute to the implementation of Union commitments towards increased transparency and accountability in the delivery of assistance, including by publicly disclosing information on assistance volume and allocation, ensuring that data is internationally comparable and can be easily accessed, shared and published.
3.   The Commission, the Member States and the European Investment Bank (EIB) shall cooperate in ensuring coherence and shall strive to avoid duplication between assistance provided under this Regulation and other assistance provided by the Union, the Member States and the EIB, including through regular and inclusive meetings aimed at coordinating the assistance.
4.   The Commission, the Member States and the EIB shall ensure coordination of their respective assistance programmes to increase effectiveness and efficiency in the delivery of assistance and to prevent double funding, in line with the established principles for strengthening operational coordination in the field of external assistance, and for the harmonisation of policies and procedures, in particular the international principles on aid effectiveness. Coordination shall involve regular consultations and frequent exchanges of information during the different phases of the assistance cycle, in particular at field level, and shall constitute a key step in the programming processes of the Member States and the Union.
5.   In order to increase effectiveness and efficiency in the delivery of assistance and to prevent double funding, the Commission, in liaison with the Member States, shall take the necessary steps to ensure better coordination and complementarity with multilateral and regional organisations and entities, such as international financial institutions, United Nations agencies, funds and programmes, and non-Union donors.
6.   When preparing, implementing and monitoring assistance under this Regulation, the Commission shall in principle act in partnership with the beneficiaries listed in Annex I. The partnership shall include, as appropriate, competent national and local authorities, as well as civil society organisations. Coordination among the relevant stakeholders shall be encouraged by the Commission.
The capacities of civil society organisations shall be strengthened, including, as appropriate, as direct beneficiaries of assistance.
