Article 4
General principles
1.   The ESI Funds shall provide support, through multi-annual programmes, which complements national, regional and local intervention, to deliver the Union strategy for smart, sustainable and inclusive growth, as well as the Fund-specific missions pursuant to their Treaty-based objectives, including economic, social and territorial cohesion taking account of the relevant Europe 2020 Integrated Guidelines and the relevant country-specific recommendations adopted in accordance with Article 121(2) TFEU, and of the relevant Council recommendations adopted in accordance with Article 148(4) TFEU and where appropriate at national level, the National Reform Programme.
2.   The Commission and the Member States shall ensure, taking account of the specific context of each Member State, that support from the ESI Funds is consistent with the relevant policies, horizontal principles referred to in Articles 5, 7 and 8 and priorities of the Union, and that it is complementary to other instruments of the Union.
3.   Support from the ESI Funds shall be implemented in close cooperation between the Commission and the Member States in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity.
4.   Member States, at the appropriate territorial level, in accordance with their institutional, legal and financial framework, and the bodies designated by them for that purpose shall be responsible for preparing and implementing programmes and carrying out their tasks, in partnership with the relevant partners referred to in Article 5, in compliance with this Regulation and the Fund-specific rules.
5.   Arrangements for the implementation and use of the ESI Funds, and in particular the financial and administrative resources required for the preparation and implementation of programmes, in relation to monitoring, reporting, evaluation, management and control, shall respect the principle of proportionality having regard to the level of support allocated and shall take into account the overall aim of reducing the administrative burden on bodies involved in the management and control of the programmes.
6.   In accordance with their respective responsibilities, the Commission and the Member States shall ensure coordination between the ESI Funds and between the ESI Funds and other relevant Union policies, strategies and instruments, including those in the framework of the Union's external action.
7.   The part of the budget of the Union allocated to the ESI Funds shall be implemented within the framework of shared management between the Member States and the Commission, in accordance with Article 59 of the Financial Regulation, with the exception of the amount of support from the Cohesion Fund transferred to the CEF referred to in Article 92(6) of this Regulation, innovative actions at the initiative of the Commission under Article 8 of the ERDF Regulation, technical assistance at the initiative of the Commission and the support for direct management under the EMFF Regulation.
8.   The Commission and the Member States shall respect the principle of sound financial management in accordance with Article 30 of the Financial Regulation.
9.   The Commission and the Member States shall ensure the effectiveness of the ESI Funds during preparation and implementation, in relation to monitoring, reporting and evaluation.
10.   The Commission and the Member States shall carry out their respective roles in relation to the ESI Funds with the aim of reducing the administrative burden on beneficiaries.
