Article 42
Eligible expenditure at closure
1.   At closure of a programme, the eligible expenditure of the financial instrument shall be the total amount of programme contributions effectively paid or, in the case of guarantees, committed by the financial instrument within the eligibility period, corresponding to:
(a)
payments to final recipients, and in the cases referred to in Article 37(7) payments to the benefit of final recipients;
(b)
resources committed for guarantee contracts, whether outstanding or already come to maturity, in order to honour possible guarantee calls for losses, calculated on the basis of a prudent ex ante risk assessment, covering a multiple amount of underlying new loans or other risk-bearing instruments for new investments in final recipients;
(c)
capitalised interest rate subsidies or guarantee fee subsidies, due to be paid for a period not exceeding 10 years after the eligibility period, used in combination with financial instruments, paid into an escrow account specifically set up for that purpose, for effective disbursement after the eligibility period, but in respect of loans or other risk-bearing instruments disbursed for investments in final recipients within the eligibility period;
(d)
reimbursement of management costs incurred or payment of management fees of the financial instrument.
The Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 149 laying down the specific rules concerning the establishment of a system of capitalisation of annual instalments for interest rate subsidies and guarantee fee subsidies referred to in point (c) of the first subparagraph.
2.   In the case of equity-based instruments and micro-credit, capitalised management costs or fees due to be paid for a period not exceeding six years after the eligibility period, in respect of investments in final recipients which occurred within the eligibility period, which cannot be covered by Articles 44 or 45, may be considered as eligible expenditure when paid into an escrow account specifically set up for that purpose.
3.   In the case of equity-based instruments targeting enterprises referred to in Article 37(4) for which the funding agreement referred to in point (b) of Article 38(7) was signed before 31 December 2017, which by the end of the eligibility period invested at least 55 % of the programme resources committed in the relevant funding agreement, a limited amount of payments for investments in final recipients to be made for a period not exceeding four years after the end of eligibility period may be considered as eligible expenditure, when paid into an escrow account specifically set up for that purpose, provided that State aid rules are complied with and that all of the conditions set out below are fulfilled.
The amount paid into the escrow account:
(a)
shall be used solely for follow-on investments in final recipients having received initial equity investments from the financial instrument within the eligibility period, which are still wholly or partially outstanding;
(b)
shall be used solely for follow-on investments to be made in accordance with market standards and market standard contractual arrangements and limited to the minimum necessary to stimulate private sector co-investment, while ensuring continuity of financing for the target enterprises so that both public and private investors can benefit from investments;
(c)
shall not exceed 20 % of the eligible expenditure of the equity-based instrument referred to in point (a) of the first subparagraph of paragraph 1 from which ceiling capital resources and gains returned to that equity-based instrument during the eligibility period shall be deducted.
Any amounts paid into the escrow account which are not used for investments in final recipients paid in the period referred to in the first subparagraph shall be used in accordance with Article 45.
4.   The eligible expenditure disclosed in accordance with paragraphs 1 and 2 shall not exceed the sum of the:
(a)
total amount of the support from the ESI Funds paid for the purposes of paragraphs 1 and 2; and
(b)
corresponding national co-financing.
5.   Management cost and fees as referred to in point (d) of the first subparagraph of paragraph 1 and in paragraph 2 of this Article may be charged by the body implementing the fund of funds or bodies implementing financial instruments pursuant to points (a) and (b) of Article 38(4) and shall not exceed the thresholds defined in the delegated act referred to in paragraph 6 of this Article. Whereas management costs shall comprise direct or indirect cost items reimbursed against evidence of expenditure, management fees shall refer to an agreed price for services rendered established via a competitive market process, where applicable. Management costs and fees shall be based on a performance based calculation methodology.
Management costs and fees may comprise arrangement fees. Where arrangement fees, or any part thereof, are charged to final recipients, they shall not be declared as eligible expenditure.
Management costs and fees, including those incurred for preparatory work in relation to the financial instrument before the signature of the relevant funding agreement, shall be eligible as from the date of signature of the relevant funding agreement.
6.   The Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts, in accordance with Article 149, laying down the specific rules setting out the criteria for determining management costs and fees on the basis of performance and the applicable thresholds as well as rules for the reimbursement of capitalised management costs and fees for equity-based instruments and micro-credit.
