Article 120
Determination of co-financing rates
1.   The Commission decision adopting an operational programme shall fix the co-financing rate and the maximum amount of support from Funds for each priority axis. Where a priority axis concerns more than one category of regions or more than one Fund, the Commission decision shall, where necessary, fix the co-financing rate by category of region and Fund.
2.   For each priority axis, the Commission decision shall set out whether the co-financing rate for the priority axis is to be applied to:
(a)
total eligible expenditure, including public and private expenditure; or
(b)
eligible public expenditure.
3.   The co-financing rate at the level of each priority axis and, where relevant, by category of region and Fund, of operational programmes under the Investment for growth and jobs goal shall be no higher than:
(a)
85 % for the Cohesion Fund;
(b)
85 % for the less developed regions of Member States whose average GDP per capita for the period 2007 - 2009 was below 85 % of the EU-27 average during the same period and for the outermost regions including the additional allocation for outermost regions in accordance with point (e) of Article 92(1) and Article 4(2) of the ETC Regulation;
(c)
80 % for the less developed regions of Member States other than those referred to in point (b), and for all regions whose GDP per capita used as an eligibility criterion for the 2007-2013 programming period was less than 75 % of the average of the EU-25 but whose GDP per capita is above 75 % of the GDP average of the EU-27, as well as for regions defined in Article 8(1) of Regulation (EU) 1083/2006 receiving transitional support for the 2007-2013 programming period;
(d)
60 % for the transition regions other than those referred to in point (c);
(e)
50 % for the more developed regions other than those referred to in point (c).
For the period from 1 January 2014 to 30 June 2017 the co-financing rate at the level of each priority axis for all operational programmes in Cyprus shall be not higher than 85 %.
The Commission shall carry out a review to assess the justification for maintaining the co-financing rate, referred to in the second subparagraph, after 30 June 2017 and shall if necessary make a legislative proposal before 30 June 2016.
The co-financing rate at the level of each priority axis of operational programmes under the European territorial cooperation goal shall be no higher than 85 %.
The maximum co-financing rate under points (b), (c), (d) and (e) of the first subparagraph shall be increased for each priority axis implementing the YEI and where a priority axis is dedicated to social innovation or to transnational cooperation, or a combination of both. That increase shall be determined in accordance with the Fund-specific rules.
4.   The co-financing rate of the additional allocation in accordance with point (e) of Article 92(1) shall be no higher than 50 % for NUTS level 2 regions fulfilling the criteria laid down in Protocol No 6 to the 1994 Act of Accession.
5.   The maximum co-financing rate under paragraph 3 at the level of a priority axis shall be increased by ten percentage points, where the whole of a priority axis is delivered through financial instruments, or through community-led local development.
6.   The contribution from the Funds for each priority axis shall not be less than 20 % of the eligible public expenditure.
7.   A separate priority axis with a co-financing rate of up to 100 % may be established within an operational programme to support operations implemented through financial instruments set up at Union level and managed directly or indirectly by the Commission. Where a separate priority axis is established for this purpose, the support under this axis may not be implemented by any other means.
