Article 8
Sustainable development
The objectives of the ESI Funds shall be pursued in line with the principle of sustainable development and with the Union's promotion of the aim of preserving, protecting and improving the quality of the environment, as set out in Article 11 and Article 191(1) TFEU, taking into account the polluter pays principle.
The Member States and the Commission shall ensure that environmental protection requirements, resource efficiency, climate change mitigation and adaptation, biodiversity, disaster resilience, and risk prevention and management are promoted in the preparation and implementation of Partnership Agreements and programmes. Member States shall provide information on the support for climate change objectives using a methodology based on the categories of intervention, focus areas or measures, as appropriate, for each of the ESI Funds. That methodology shall consist of assigning a specific weighting to the support provided under the ESI Funds at a level which reflects the extent to which such support makes a contribution to climate change mitigation and adaptation goals. The specific weighting assigned shall be differentiated on the basis of whether the support makes a significant or a moderate contribution towards climate change objectives. Where the support does not contribute towards those objectives or the contribution is insignificant, a weighting of zero shall be assigned. In the case of the ERDF, the ESF and the Cohesion Fund weightings shall be attached to categories of intervention established within the nomenclature adopted by the Commission. In the case of the EAFRD weightings shall be attached to focus areas set out in the EAFRD Regulation and in the case of the EMFF to measures set out in the EMFF Regulation.
The Commission shall set out uniform conditions for each of the ESI Funds for the application of the methodology referred to in the second paragraph by means of an implementing act. That implementing act shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 150(3).
