Article 50
Implementation reports
1.   From 2016 until and including 2023, each Member State shall submit to the Commission an annual report on implementation of the programme in the previous financial year. Each Member State shall submit to the Commission a final report on implementation of the programme for the ERDF, the ESF and the Cohesion Fund and an annual implementation report for the EAFRD and the EMFF by the deadline established in the Fund-specific rules.
2.   Annual implementation reports shall set out key information on implementation of the programme and its priorities by reference to the financial data, common and programme-specific indicators and quantified target values, including changes in the value of result indicators where appropriate, and, beginning from the annual implementation report to be submitted in 2017, the milestones defined in the performance framework. The data transmitted shall relate to values for indicators for fully implemented operations and also, where possible, having regard to the stage of implementation, for selected operations. They shall also set out a synthesis of the findings of all evaluations of the programme that have become available during the previous financial year, any issues which affect the performance of the programme, and the measures taken. The annual implementation report to be submitted in 2016 may also set out, where relevant, actions taken to fulfil ex ante conditionalities.
3.   By way of derogation from paragraph 2, specific rules on the data to be transmitted for the ESF may be established in the ESF Regulation.
4.   The annual implementation report to be submitted in 2017 shall set out and assess the information referred to in paragraph 2 and progress made towards achieving the objectives of the programme, including the contribution of the ESI Funds to changes in the value of result indicators, when evidence is available from relevant evaluations. That annual implementation report shall set out the actions taken to fulfil the ex-ante conditionalities not fulfilled at the time of adoption of the programmes. It shall also assess the implementation of actions to take into account the principles set out in Articles 7 and 8, the role of the partners referred to in Article 5 in the implementation of the programme and report on support used for climate change objectives.
5.   The annual implementation report to be submitted in 2019 and the final implementation report for the ESI Funds shall, in addition to the information and assessment referred to in paragraphs 2 and 3, include information on, and assess progress towards, achieving the objectives of the programme and its contribution to achieving the Union strategy for smart, sustainable and inclusive growth.
6.   In order to be deemed admissible, the annual implementation reports referred to in paragraphs 1 to 5 shall contain all the information required in those paragraphs and in the Fund-specific rules.
The Commission shall inform the Member State within 15 working days of the date of receipt of the annual implementation report if it is not admissible, failing which it shall be deemed admissible.
7.   The Commission shall examine the annual and final implementation report and inform the Member State of its observations within two months of the date of receipt of the annual implementation report and within five months of the date of receipt of the final implementation report. Where the Commission does not provide observations within those deadlines, the reports shall be deemed to be accepted.
8.   The Commission may make observations to the managing authority concerning issues which significantly affect the implementation of the programme. Where such observations are made, the managing authority shall provide all necessary information with regard to those observations and, where appropriate, inform the Commission, within three months, of measures taken.
9.   The annual and final implementation reports, as well as a summary for citizens of their content, shall be made available to the public.
