Article 111
Implementation reports for the Investment for growth and jobs goal
1.   By 31 May 2016 and by the same date of each subsequent year until and including 2023 the Member State shall submit to the Commission an annual implementation report in accordance with Article 50(1). The report submitted in 2016 shall cover the financial years 2014 and 2015, as well as the period between the starting date for eligibility of expenditure and 31 December 2013.
2.   For the reports submitted in 2017 and 2019, the deadline referred to in paragraph 1 shall be 30 June.
3.   Annual implementation reports shall set out information on:
(a)
implementation of the operational programme in accordance with Article 50(2);
(b)
progress in preparation and implementation of major projects and joint action plans.
4.   The annual implementation reports submitted in 2017 and 2019 shall set out and assess the information required under Article 50(4) and (5) respectively and the information set out in paragraph 3 of this Article together with the following information:
(a)
progress in the implementation of the evaluation plan and the follow-up given to the findings of evaluations;
(b)
the results of the information and publicity measures of the Funds carried out under the communication strategy;
(c)
the involvement of the partners in the implementation, monitoring and evaluation of the operational programme.
The annual implementation reports submitted in 2017 and 2019 may, depending on the content and objectives of operational programmes, set out information and assess the following:
(a)
progress in the implementation of the integrated approach to territorial development, including development of regions facing demographic challenges and permanent or natural handicaps, sustainable urban development, and community-led local development under the operational programme;
(b)
progress in the implementation of actions to reinforce the capacity of Member State authorities and beneficiaries to administer and use the Funds;
(c)
progress in the implementation of any interregional and transnational actions;
(d)
where appropriate, the contribution to macro-regional and sea basin strategies;
(e)
the specific actions taken to promote equality between men and women and to prevent discrimination, in particular accessibility for persons with disabilities, and the arrangements implemented to ensure the integration of the gender perspective in the operational programme and operations;
(f)
actions taken to promote sustainable development in accordance with Article 8;
(g)
progress in the implementation of actions in the field of social innovation, where appropriate;
(h)
progress in the implementation of measures to address the specific needs of geographical areas most affected by poverty or of target groups at highest risk of poverty, discrimination or social exclusion, with special regard to marginalised communities and persons with disabilities, long term unemployed and young people not in employment, including, where appropriate, the financial resources used.
By way of derogation from the first and second subparagraphs, and in order to ensure consistency between the Partnership Agreement and the progress report, Member States with no more than one operational programme per Fund may include the information relating to ex ante conditionalities referred to in Article 50(3), the information required by Article 50(4) and the information referred to in points (a), (b), (c) and (h) of the second subparagraph of this paragraph in the progress report instead of the annual implementation reports submitted in 2017 and 2019 respectively and the final implementation report, without prejudice to point (b) of Article 110(2).
5.   The Commission shall, in order to ensure uniform conditions for the implementation of this Article, adopt implementing acts establishing the models for the annual and final implementation reports. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the advisory procedure referred to in Article 150(2).
