Article 27
Content of programmes
1.   Each programme shall set out a strategy for the programme's contribution to the Union strategy for smart, sustainable and inclusive growth consistent with this Regulation, the Fund-specific rules, and with the content of the Partnership Agreement.
Each programme shall include arrangements to ensure effective, efficient and coordinated implementation of the ESI Funds and actions to achieve a reduction of the administrative burden on beneficiaries.
2.   Each programme shall define priorities setting out specific objectives, financial appropriations of support from the ESI Funds and corresponding national co-financing, including amounts related to the performance reserve, which may be public or private in accordance with the Fund-specific rules.
3.   Where Member States and regions participate in macro-regional strategies or sea basin strategies, the relevant programme, in accordance with the needs of the programme area as identified by the Member State, shall set out the contribution of the planned interventions to those strategies.
4.   Each priority shall set out indicators and corresponding targets expressed in qualitative or quantitative terms, in accordance with the Fund-specific rules, in order to assess progress in programme implementation aimed at achievement of objectives as the basis for monitoring, evaluation and review of performance. Those indicators shall include:
(a)
financial indicators relating to expenditure allocated;
(b)
output indicators relating to the operations supported;
(c)
result indicators relating to the priority concerned.
For each ESI Fund, the Fund-specific rules shall set out common indicators and may set out provisions related to programme-specific indicators.
5.   Each programme, except those which cover exclusively technical assistance, shall include a description, in accordance with the Fund-specific rules, of the actions to take into account the principles set out in Articles 5, 7 and 8.
6.   Each programme, except those where technical assistance is undertaken under a specific programme, shall set out the indicative amount of support to be used for climate change objectives, based on the methodology referred to in Article 8.
7.   Member States shall draft the programme in accordance with the Fund-specific rules.
