Article 52
Progress report
1.   By 31 August 2017 and by 31 August 2019, the Member State shall submit to the Commission a progress report on implementation of the Partnership Agreement as at 31 December 2016 and 31 December 2018 respectively.
2.   The progress report shall set out information on and assess:
(a)
changes in the development needs in the Member State since the adoption of the Partnership Agreement;
(b)
progress made towards achievement of the Union strategy for smart, sustainable and inclusive growth, as well as of the Fund-specific missions referred to in Article 4(1), through the contribution of the ESI Funds to the thematic objectives selected, and in particular with regard to the milestones set out in the performance framework for each programme, and to the support used for climate change objectives;
(c)
whether the actions taken to fulfil the applicable ex ante conditionalities set out in the Partnership Agreement not fulfilled at the date of adoption of the Partnership Agreement have been implemented in accordance with the timetable established. This point shall only apply to the progress report to be submitted in 2017;
(d)
implementation of mechanisms to ensure coordination between the ESI Funds and other Union and national funding instruments and with the EIB;
(e)
implementation of the integrated approach to territorial development, or a summary of the implementation of the integrated approaches that are based on the programmes, including progress towards achievement of priority areas established for cooperation;
(f)
where appropriate, actions taken to reinforce the capacity of the Member State authorities and beneficiaries to administer and use the ESI Funds;
(g)
actions taken, and progress made, with regard to reducing the administrative burden on beneficiaries;
(h)
the role of the partners referred to in Article 5 in the implementation of the Partnership Agreement;
(i)
a summary of the actions taken in relation to the application of the horizontal principles referred to in Articles 5, 7 and 8 and policy objectives for the implementation of the ESI Funds.
3.   Where the Commission determines, within two months of the date of submission of the progress report, that the information submitted is incomplete or unclear in a manner which significantly affects the quality and reliability of the assessment concerned, it may request additional information from the Member State, on condition that that request does not cause unjustified delays and that the Commission provides reasons to substantiate the alleged lack of quality and reliability. The Member State shall provide to the Commission the information requested within three months and, where appropriate, shall revise the progress report accordingly.
4.   The Commission shall, in order to ensure uniform conditions for the implementation of this Article, adopt implementing acts establishing the model to be used when submitting the progress report. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the advisory procedure referred to in Article 150(2).
