Article 103
Decision on a major project subject to phased implementation
1.   By way of derogation from the third paragraph of Article 101 and Article 102(1) and (2), the procedures set out in paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 of this Article shall apply to an operation which satisfies the following conditions:
(a)
the operation consists of the second or subsequent phase of a major project under the previous programming period for which the preceding phase or phases are approved by the Commission not later than 31 December 2015 pursuant to Regulation (EC) No 1083/2006; or in the case of Member States which acceded to the Union after 1 January 2013, no later than 31 December 2016;
(b)
the sum of the total eligible costs of all phases of the major project exceeds the respective levels set out in Article 100;
(c)
the major project application and assessment by the Commission under the previous programming period covered all the planned phases;
(d)
there are no substantial changes in the information referred to in the first paragraph of Article 101 of this Regulation for the major project compared to the information provided for the major project application submitted under Regulation (EC) No 1083/2006, in particular as regards the total eligible cost;
(e)
the phase of the major project to be implemented under the previous programming period is or will be ready to be used for its intended purpose as specified in the Commission decision by the deadline of the submission of the closure documents for the relevant operational programme or programmes.
2.   The managing authority may proceed with the selection of the major project in accordance with Article 125(3) and submit the notification containing all the elements set out in point (a) of the first subparagraph of Article 102(1) together with its confirmation that the condition under point (d) of paragraph 1 of this Article is fulfilled. No quality review of the information by independent experts shall be required.
3.   The financial contribution to the major project selected by the managing authority shall be deemed to be approved by the Commission in the absence of a decision, by means of an implementing act, refusing the financial contribution to the major project within three months of the date of the notification referred to in paragraph 2. The Commission shall refuse the financial contribution only on the grounds that there have been substantial changes in the information referred to in point (d) of paragraph 1 or that the major project is not consistent with the relevant priority axis of the operational programme or programmes concerned.
4.   Article 102(3) to (6) shall apply to decisions on a major project subject to phased implementation.
