Article 38
Implementation of financial instruments
1.   In implementing Article 37, managing authorities may provide a financial contribution to the following financial instruments:
(a)
financial instruments set up at Union level, managed directly or indirectly by the Commission;
(b)
financial instruments set up at national, regional, transnational or cross-border level, managed by or under the responsibility of the managing authority.
2.   Contributions from the ESI Funds to financial instruments under point (a) of paragraph 1 shall be placed in separate accounts and used, in accordance with the objectives of the respective ESI Funds, to support actions and final recipients consistent with the programme or programmes from which such contributions are made.
Contributions to the financial instruments referred to in the first subparagraph shall be subject to this Regulation unless exceptions are expressly provided for.
The second subparagraph is without prejudice to the rules governing the set up and functioning of the financial instruments under the Financial Regulation, unless those rules conflict with the rules of this Regulation, in which case this Regulation prevails.
3.   For financial instruments under point (b) of paragraph 1, the managing authority may provide a financial contribution to the following financial instruments:
(a)
financial instruments complying with the standard terms and conditions laid down by the Commission, in accordance with the second subparagraph of this paragraph;
(b)
already existing or newly created financial instruments which are specifically designed to achieve the specific objectives set out under the relevant priority.
The Commission shall adopt implementing acts concerning the standard terms and conditions with which the financial instruments under point (a) of the first subparagraph shall comply. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 150(3).
4.   When supporting financial instruments referred to in point (b) of paragraph 1 the managing authority may:
(a)
invest in the capital of existing or newly created legal entities, including those financed from other ESI Funds, dedicated to implementing financial instruments consistent with the objectives of the respective ESI Funds, which will undertake implementation tasks; the support to such entities shall be limited to the amounts necessary to implement new investments in accordance with Article 37 and in a manner that is consistent with the objectives of this Regulation;
(b)
entrust implementation tasks to:
(i)
the EIB;
(ii)
international financial institutions in which a Member State is a shareholder, or financial institutions established in a Member State aiming at the achievement of public interest under the control of a public authority;
(iii)
a body governed by public or private law; or
(c)
undertake implementation tasks directly, in the case of financial instruments consisting solely of loans or guarantees. In that case the managing authority shall be considered to be the beneficiary as defined in point (10) of Article 2.
When implementing the financial instrument, the bodies referred to in points (a),(b) and (c) of the first subparagraph shall ensure compliance with applicable law, including rules covering the ESI Funds, State aid, public procurement and relevant standards and applicable legislation on the prevention of money laundering, the fight against terrorism and tax fraud. Those bodies shall not be established and shall not maintain business relations with entities incorporated in territories, whose jurisdictions do not cooperate with the Union in relation to the application of the internationally agreed tax standards and shall transpose such requirements in their contracts with the selected financial intermediaries.
The Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 149 laying down additional specific rules on the role, liabilities and responsibility of bodies implementing financial instruments, related selection criteria and products that may be delivered through financial instruments in accordance with Article 37. The Commission shall notify those delegated acts simultaneously to the European Parliament and the Council by 22 april 2014.
5.   The bodies referred to in points (a) and (b) of the first subparagraph of paragraph 4, when implementing funds of funds may further entrust part of the implementation to financial intermediaries provided that such entities ensure under their responsibility that the financial intermediaries satisfy the criteria laid down in Article 140(1),(2) and (4) of the Financial Regulation. Financial intermediaries shall be selected on the basis of open, transparent, proportionate and non-discriminatory procedures, avoiding conflicts of interest.
6.   The bodies referred to in point (b) of the first subparagraph of paragraph 4 to which implementation tasks have been entrusted shall open fiduciary accounts in their name and on behalf of the managing authority, or set up the financial instrument as a separate block of finance within the financial institution. In the case of a separate block of finance, an accounting distinction shall be made between programme resources invested in the financial instrument and the other resources available in the financial institution. The assets held on fiduciary accounts and such separate blocks of finance shall be managed in accordance with the principle of sound financial management following appropriate prudential rules and shall have appropriate liquidity.
7.   Where a financial instrument is implemented under points (a) and (b) of the first subparagraph of paragraph 4, subject to the implementation structure of the financial instrument, the terms and conditions for contributions from programmes to financial instruments shall be set out in funding agreements in accordance with Annex III at the following levels:
(a)
where applicable, between the duly mandated representatives of the managing authority and the body that implements the fund of funds; and
(b)
between the duly mandated representatives of the managing authority, or where applicable, the body that implements the fund of funds, and the body that implements the financial instrument.
8.   For financial instruments implemented under point (c) of the first subparagraph of paragraph 4, the terms and conditions for contributions from programmes to financial instruments shall be set out in a strategy document in accordance with Annex IV to be examined by the monitoring committee.
9.   National public and private contributions, including where relevant contributions in kind as referred to in Article 37(10), may be provided at the level of the fund of funds, at the level of the financial instrument or at the level of final recipients, in accordance with the Fund-specific rules.
10.   The Commission shall adopt implementing acts laying down uniform conditions regarding the detailed arrangements for the transfer and management of programme contributions managed by the bodies referred to in the first subparagraph of paragraph 4. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 150(3).
