Article 40
Management and control of financial instruments
1.   Bodies designated in accordance with Article 124 of this Regulation for ERDF, Cohesion Fund, ESF, EMFF and with Article 65 of the EAFRD Regulation for the EAFRD shall not carry out on-the spot verifications of operations comprising financial instruments implemented under point (a) of Article 38(1). Those designated bodies shall receive regular control reports from the bodies entrusted with the implementation of those financial instruments.
2.   The bodies responsible for the audit of programmes shall not carry out audits of operations comprising financial instruments implemented under point (a) of Article 38(1) and of management and control systems relating to those financial instruments. They shall receive regular control reports from the auditors designated in the agreements setting up those financial instruments.
3.   The bodies responsible for the audit of programmes may conduct audits at the level of final recipients only when one or more of the following situations occur:
(a)
supporting documents, providing evidence of the support from the financial instrument to final recipients and of its use for the intended purposes in line with applicable law, are not available at the level of the managing authority or at the level of the bodies that implement financial instruments;
(b)
there is evidence that the documents available at the level of the managing authority or at the level of the bodies that implement financial instruments do not represent a true and accurate record of the support provided.
4.   The Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts, in accordance with Article 149, concerning the management and control of financial instruments referred to in point (b) of Article 38(1), including controls to be performed by managing and audit authorities, arrangements for keeping supporting documents, elements to be evidenced by supporting documents, and management and control and audit arrangements. The Commission shall notify those delegated acts simultaneously to the European Parliament and the Council by 22 April 2014.
5.   The bodies implementing financial instruments shall be responsible for ensuring that supporting documents are available and shall not impose on final recipients record-keeping requirements that go beyond what is necessary to enable them to fulfil that responsibility.
