Article 46
Report on implementation of financial instruments
1.   The managing authority shall send to the Commission a specific report covering the operations comprising financial instruments as an annex to the annual implementation report.
2.   The specific report referred to in paragraph 1 shall include, for each financial instrument, the following information:
(a)
identification of the programme and of the priority or measure from which support from the ESI Funds is provided;
(b)
description of the financial instrument and implementation arrangements;
(c)
identification of the bodies implementing financial instruments, and the bodies implementing funds of funds where applicable, as referred to under point (a) of Article 38(1), points (a), (b) and (c) of Article 38(4), and the financial intermediaries referred to under Article 38(6);
(d)
total amount of programme contributions by priority or measure paid to the financial instrument;
(e)
total amount of support paid to the final recipients or to the benefit of final recipients, or committed in guarantee contracts by the financial instrument for investments in final recipients, as well as management costs incurred or management fees paid, by programme and priority or measure;
(f)
the performance of the financial instrument including progress in its set-up and in selection of bodies implementing the financial instrument, including the body implementing a fund of funds;
(g)
interest and other gains generated by support from the ESI Funds to the financial instrument and programme resources paid back to financial instruments from investments as referred to in Articles 43 and 44;
(h)
progress in achieving the expected leverage effect of investments made by the financial instrument and value of investments and participations;
(i)
the value of equity investments, with respect to previous years;
(j)
contribution of the financial instrument to the achievement of the indicators of the priority or measure concerned.
The information in points (h) and (j) of the first subparagraph may be included only in the annex to the annual implementation reports submitted in 2017 and 2019 as well as in the final implementation report. The reporting obligations set out in points (a) to (j) of the first subparagraph shall not be applied at the level of final recipients.
3.   The Commission shall, in order to ensure uniform conditions for the implementation of this Article, adopt implementing acts establishing the models to be used when reporting on financial instruments to the Commission. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 150(3).
4.   Each year, starting in 2016, the Commission shall, within six months of the deadline for the submission of the annual implementation reports referred to in Article 111(1) for the ERDF, ESF and the Cohesion Fund, Article 75 of the EAFRD Regulation for the EAFRD, and the relevant provisions of Funds-specific rules for the EMFF, provide summaries of the data on the progress made in financing and implementing the financial instruments, sent by the managing authorities in accordance with this Article. Those summaries shall be transmitted to the European Parliament and the Council and shall be made public.

Section I



Monitoring of programmes


