Article 61
Operations generating net revenue after completion
1.   This Article shall apply to operations which generate net revenue after their completion. For the purposes of this Article 'net revenue' means cash in-flows directly paid by users for the goods or services provided by the operation, such as charges borne directly by users for the use of infrastructure, sale or rent of land or buildings, or payments for services less any operating costs and replacement costs of short-life equipment incurred during the corresponding period. Operating cost-savings generated by the operation shall be treated as net revenue unless they are offset by an equal reduction in operating subsidies.
Where not all the investment cost is eligible for co-financing, the net revenue shall be allocated pro rata to the eligible and non-eligible parts of the investment cost.
2.   The eligible expenditure of the operation to be co-financed from the ESI Funds shall be reduced in advance taking into account the potential of the operation to generate net revenue over a specific reference period that covers both implementation of the operation and the period after its completion.
3.   The potential net revenue of the operation shall be determined in advance by one of the following methods chosen by the managing authority for a sector, subsector or type of operation:
(a)
application of a flat rate net revenue percentage for the sector or subsector applicable to the operation as defined in Annex V or in any of the delegated acts referred to in the second, third and fourth subparagraphs;
(b)
calculation of the discounted net revenue of the operation, taking into account the reference period appropriate to the sector or subsector applicable to the operation, the profitability normally expected of the category of investment concerned, the application of the polluter-pays principle and, if appropriate, considerations of equity linked to the relative prosperity of the Member State or region concerned.
The Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 149 in duly justified cases to amend Annex V by adjusting the flat rates established therein taking into account historical data, the potential for cost recovery and the polluter-pays principle where applicable.
The Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 149 establishing flat rates for sectors or subsectors within the fields of ICT, RDI and energy efficiency. The Commission shall notify the delegated acts to the European Parliament and the Council not later than 30 June 2015.
In addition, the Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 149 in duly justified cases with regard to adding sectors or subsectors, including subsectors for sectors in Annex V, falling under the thematic objectives defined in the first paragraph of Article 9 and supported by the ESI Funds.
Where the method referred to in point (a) of the first subparagraph is applied, all the net revenue generated during implementation and after completion of the operation shall be considered to be taken into account by the application of the flat rate and shall therefore not be deducted subsequently from the eligible expenditure of the operation.
When a flat rate for a new sector or subsector has been established by the adoption of a delegated act in accordance with the third and fourth subparagraphs, a managing authority may choose to apply the method set out in point (a) of the first subparagraph for new operations in relation to the sector or subsector concerned.
The Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts, in accordance with Article 149, laying down the method referred to in point (b) of the first subparagraph. Where that method is applied, the net revenue generated during implementation of the operation, resulting from sources of revenue not taken into account in determining the potential net revenue of the operation, shall be deducted from the eligible expenditure of the operation, no later than in the final payment claim submitted by the beneficiary.
4.   The method by which the net revenue is deducted from the expenditure of the operation included in the request for payment submitted to the Commission shall be determined in accordance with national rules.
5.   As an alternative to the application of the methods laid down in paragraph 3, the maximum co-financing rate referred to in Article 60(1) may, at the request of a Member State, be decreased at the moment of adoption of a programme for a priority or measure under which all operations supported under that priority or measure could apply a uniform flat rate in accordance with point (a) of the first subparagraph of paragraph 3. The decrease shall be not less than the amount calculated by multiplying the maximum Union co-financing rate applicable under the Fund-specific rules by the relevant flat rate referred to in point (a) of the first subparagraph of paragraph 3.
Where the method referred to in the first subparagraph is applied, all net revenue generated during implementation, and after completion, of the operation shall be considered to be taken into account by application of the decreased co-financing rate and shall therefore not be deducted subsequently from the eligible expenditure of the operations.
6.   Where it is objectively not possible to determine the revenue in advance based on any of the methods set out in paragraphs 3 or 5, the net revenue generated within three years of the completion of an operation, or by the deadline for the submission of documents for programme closure fixed in the Fund-specific rules, whichever is the earlier, shall be deducted from the expenditure declared to the Commission.
7.   Paragraphs 1 to 6 shall not apply to:
(a)
operations or parts of operations supported solely by the ESF;
(b)
operations whose total eligible cost before application of paragraphs 1 to 6 does not exceed EUR 1 000 000;
(c)
repayable assistance subject to an obligation for full repayment and prizes;
(d)
technical assistance;
(e)
support to or from financial instruments;
(f)
operations for which public support takes the form of lump sums or standard scale unit costs;
(g)
operations implemented under a joint action plan;
(h)
operations for which amounts or rates of support are defined in Annex II to the EAFRD Regulation.
Notwithstanding point (b) of the first subparagraph of this paragraph, where a Member State applies paragraph 5, it may include in the relevant priority or measure operations whose total eligible cost before application of paragraphs 1 to 6 does not exceed EUR 1 000 000.
8.   In addition, paragraphs 1 to 6 shall not apply to operations for which support under the programme constitutes:
(a)
de minimis aid;
(b)
compatible State aid to SMEs, where an aid intensity or an aid amount limit is applied in relation to State aid;
(c)
compatible State aid, where an individual verification of financing needs in accordance with the applicable State aid rules has been carried out.
Notwithstanding the first subparagraph, a managing authority may apply the paragraphs 1 to 6 to operations which fall under points (a) to (c) of the first subparagraph of this paragraph where this is provided for in national rules.
