Article 144
Criteria for financial corrections
1.   The Commission shall make financial corrections, by means of implementing acts, by cancelling all or part of the Union contribution to an operational programme in accordance with Article 85, where, after carrying out the necessary examination, it concludes that:
(a)
there is a serious deficiency in the effective functioning of the management and control system of the operational programme which has put at risk the Union contribution already paid to the operational programme;
(b)
the Member State has not complied with its obligations under Article 143 prior to the opening of the correction procedure under this paragraph;
(c)
expenditure contained in a payment application is irregular and has not been corrected by the Member State prior to the opening of the correction procedure under this paragraph.
The Commission shall base its financial corrections on individual cases of identified irregularity and shall take account of whether an irregularity is systemic. Where it is not possible to quantify precisely the amount of irregular expenditure charged to the Funds or the EMFF, the Commission shall apply a flat rate or extrapolated financial correction.
2.   The Commission shall, when deciding on a correction under paragraph 1, respect the principle of proportionality by taking account of the nature and gravity of the irregularity and the extent and financial implications of the deficiencies in management and control systems found in the operational programme.
3.   Where the Commission bases its position on reports of auditors other than those of its own services, it shall draw its own conclusions regarding the financial consequences after examining the measures taken by the Member State concerned under Article 143(2), the notifications sent under Article 122(2), and any replies from the Member State.
4.   In accordance with Article 22(7), where the Commission, based on the examination of the final implementation report of the operational programme for the Funds or the last annual implementation report for the EMFF, establishes a serious failure to achieve the targets set out in the performance framework, it may apply financial corrections in respect of the priorities concerned, by means of implementing acts.
5.   When a Member State does not comply with its obligations under Article 95, the Commission may, in relation to the degree of non-compliance with those obligations, make a financial correction by cancelling all or part of the Structural Funds contribution to the Member State concerned.
6.   The Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 149, laying down detailed rules concerning the criteria for determining serious deficiencies in the effective functioning of management and control systems, including the main types of such deficiencies, the criteria for establishing the level of financial correction to be applied and the criteria for applying flat rates or extrapolated financial corrections.
7.   The Fund-specific rules for the EMFF may lay down specific bases for financial corrections by the Commission linked to non-compliance with rules applicable under the Common Fisheries Policy which shall be proportionate having regard to the nature, gravity, duration and recurrence of the non-compliance.
