Article 30
Amendment of programmes
1.   Requests for amendment of programmes submitted by a Member State shall be duly justified and shall in particular set out the expected impact of the changes to the programme on achieving the Union strategy for smart, sustainable and inclusive growth and the specific objectives defined in the programme, taking account of this Regulation and the Fund-specific rules, the horizontal principles referred to in Articles 5, 7 and 8, as well as of the Partnership Agreement. They shall be accompanied by the revised programme.
2.   The Commission shall assess the information provided in accordance with paragraph 1, taking account of the justification provided by the Member State. The Commission may make observations within one month of the submission of the revised programme and the Member State shall provide to the Commission all necessary additional information. In accordance with the Fund-specific rules, the Commission shall approve requests for amendment of a programme as soon as possible but no later than three months after their submission by the Member State provided that any observations made by the Commission have been adequately taken into account.
Where the amendment of a programme affects the information provided in the Partnership Agreement in accordance with points (a)(iii), (iv) and (vi) of Article 15(1)), the approval of the amendment of the programme by the Commission shall at the same time constitute an approval for the consequential revision of the information in the Partnership Agreement.
3.   By way of derogation from paragraph 2, where the request for amendment is submitted to the Commission in order to reallocate the performance reserve following the performance review, the Commission shall make observations only where it considers that the allocation proposed is not in compliance with applicable rules, is not consistent with the development needs of the Member State or the region, or entails a significant risk that the objectives and targets included in the proposal cannot be achieved. The Commission shall approve the request for amendment of a programme as soon as possible and no later than two months after the submission of the request by the Member State provided that any observations made by the Commission have been adequately taken into account. The approval of the amendment of the programme by the Commission shall at the same time constitute an approval for the consequential revision of the information in the Partnership Agreement.
4.   By way of derogation from paragraph 2, specific procedures for the amendment of operational programmes may be established in the EMFF Regulation.
