Article 71
Durability of operations
1.   An operation comprising investment in infrastructure or productive investment shall repay the contribution from the ESI Funds if within five years of the final payment to the beneficiary or within the period of time set out in State aid rules, where applicable, it is subject to any of the following:
(a)
a cessation or relocation of a productive activity outside the programme area;
(b)
a change in ownership of an item of infrastructure which gives to a firm or a public body an undue advantage;
(c)
a substantial change affecting its nature, objectives or implementation conditions which would result in undermining its original objectives.
Sums unduly paid in respect of the operation shall be recovered by the Member State in proportion to the period for which the requirements have not been fulfilled.
Member States may reduce the time limit set out in the first subparagraph to three years in cases concerning the maintenance of investments or jobs created by SMEs.
2.   An operation comprising investment in infrastructure or productive investment shall repay the contribution from the ESI Funds if within 10 years of the final payment to the beneficiary the productive activity is subject to relocation outside the Union, except where the beneficiary is an SME. Where the contribution from the ESI Funds takes the form of State aid, the period of 10 years shall be replaced by the deadline applicable under State aid rules.
3.   Operations supported by the ESF and operations supported by the other ESI Funds that are not investments in infrastructure or productive investments shall repay the contribution from the Fund only where they are subject to an obligation for maintenance of investment under the applicable State aid rules and where they undergo a cessation or relocation of a productive activity within the period laid down in those rules.
4.   Paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 shall not apply to contributions to or by financial instruments or to any operation which undergoes cessation of a productive activity due to a non-fraudulent bankruptcy.
5.   Paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 shall not apply to natural persons who are beneficiaries of investment support and, after the completion of the investment operation, become eligible for and receive support under Regulation (EU) No 1309/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council where the investment concerned is directly linked to the type of activity identified as eligible for support from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund.
TITLE VIII

MANAGEMENT AND CONTROL

