Article 46
Information, communication and visibility
1.   The recipients of Union funding shall acknowledge the origin of those funds and ensure the visibility of the Union funding, in particular when promoting and reporting on the actions, and their results by highlighting the support received from the Union in a visible manner on communication material related to the actions supported under the Instrument, and by providing coherent, effective and proportionate targeted information to multiple audiences, including the media and the public.
Agreements concluded with the recipients of Union funding shall contain obligations in that respect.
2.   The Commission shall implement information and communication actions relating to the Instrument, to actions taken pursuant to the Instrument and to the results obtained. Financial resources allocated to the Instrument shall also contribute to the corporate communication of and reporting on the political priorities of the Union, insofar as those priorities are related to the objectives of the Instrument.
3.   The Instrument shall support strategic communication and public diplomacy, including the fight against disinformation, with a view to communicating the values of the Union as well as the added value of, and results achieved by, the Union’s actions.
4.   The Commission shall make publicly available information on actions financed under the Instrument as referred to in Article 38 of the Financial Regulation, including as appropriate through a comprehensive single website.
5.   The website referred to in paragraph 4 shall also include information on financing and investment operations and the essential elements of all External Action Guarantee agreements, including information on the legal identity of eligible counterparts, expected development benefits and complaints procedures, in accordance with point (h) of Article 38(3), taking into account the protection of confidential and commercially sensitive information.
6.   Eligible EFSD + counterparts, in accordance with their transparency policies and Union rules on data protection and on access to documents and information, shall proactively and systematically make publicly available on their websites information relating to all financing and investment operations covered by the External Action Guarantee, relating in particular to the manner in which those operations contribute to the achievement of the objectives and requirements set out in this Regulation. Where possible, such information shall be broken down at project level. Such information shall always take into account the protection of confidential and commercially sensitive information. Eligible EFSD+ counterparts shall also publicise Union support in all information which they publish on financing and investment operations covered by the External Action Guarantee in accordance with this Regulation.
