Article 25
Adoption of action plans and measures
1.   Action plans and measures shall be adopted by means of implementing acts. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 45(2).
2.   The procedure referred to in paragraph 1 shall not be required for:
(a)
individual measures for which the Union’s funding does not exceed EUR 5 000 000;
(b)
special and support measures as well as action plans adopted in order to implement rapid response actions for which the Union’s funding does not exceed EUR 10 000 000;
(c)
exceptional assistance measures referred to in Article 23(4) for which the Union’s funding does not exceed EUR 20 000 000;
(d)
technical amendments to action plans and measures, provided such amendments do not substantially affect the objectives of the action plan or measure concerned, such as:
(i)
change of method of implementation;
(ii)
extensions of the implementation period;
(iii)
reassignments of funds between actions contained in an action plan;
(iv)
increases or reductions of the budget of action plans and measures by not more than 20 % of the initial budget and not exceeding EUR 10 000 000.
In case of multiannual action plans and measures, the thresholds referred to in points (a), (b) and (c) and point (d)(iv) of the first subparagraph of paragraph 2 shall be applicable on a yearly basis.
When adopted in accordance with this paragraph, action plans and measures, except exceptional assistance measures, and technical amendments shall be communicated to the European Parliament and to the Member States through the relevant committee referred to in Article 45 within one month of their adoption.
3.   Before the adoption or extension of exceptional assistance measures not exceeding EUR 20 000 000, the Commission shall inform the European Parliament and the Council of their nature and objectives and of the financial amounts envisaged. The Commission shall inform the European Parliament and the Council before making significant substantive changes to exceptional assistance measures already adopted. The Commission shall take account of the relevant policy approach for the planning and subsequent implementation of such measures, in the interest of consistency of the Union’s external action.
4.   Where duly justified, imperative grounds of urgency, such as crises, including natural or man-made disasters, or immediate threats to democracy, the rule of law, human rights or fundamental freedoms so require, the Commission may adopt action plans and measures or amendments to existing action plans and measures, as immediately applicable implementing acts, in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 45(4).
5.   Appropriate environmental screening, including for climate change and biodiversity impacts, shall be undertaken at the level of actions, in accordance with the applicable legislative acts of the Union, including Directive 2011/92/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council (42) and Council Directive 85/337/EEC (43), comprising, where applicable, an environmental impact assessment, including the impact on climate change, ecosystems and biodiversity, for environmentally sensitive actions, in particular for major new infrastructure.
Other appropriate ex ante assessments which are proportionate to the objectives and amounts of the envisaged actions and measures shall be carried out, to determine the possible implications and risks of those actions and measures with regard to human rights, access to natural resources such as land, and social standards including in the form of impact assessments for major actions and measures that are expected to have a significant impact on those areas.
Where relevant, strategic environmental assessments, including the impact on climate change, shall be used in the implementation of sectoral programmes. The involvement of interested stakeholders in environmental assessments and public access to the results of such assessments shall be ensured.
