Article 30
Carry-overs, annual instalments, commitment appropriations, re-payments and revenue generated by financial instruments and budgetary guarantees
1.   In addition to Article 12(4) of the Financial Regulation, unused commitment and payment appropriations under the Instrument shall be automatically carried-over and may be committed and used, respectively, up to 31 December of the following financial year. The amount carried over shall be used first in the following financial year.
The Commission shall inform the European Parliament and the Council of commitment appropriations carried-over in accordance with Article 12(6) of the Financial Regulation.
2.   In addition to the rules laid down in Article 15 of the Financial Regulation on making appropriations available again, commitment appropriations corresponding to the amount of decommitments made as a result of total or partial non-implementation of an action under the Instrument shall be made available again to the benefit of the budget line of origin.
3.   Budgetary commitments for actions extending over more than one financial year may be broken down over several years into annual instalments, in accordance with Article 112(2) of the Financial Regulation.
The third subparagraph of Article 114(2) of the Financial Regulation shall not apply to the multiannual actions referred to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph. The Commission shall automatically decommit any portion of a budgetary commitment for an action which, by 31 December of the fifth year following that of the budgetary commitment, has not been used for the purpose of pre-financing or making interim payments, or for which no certified statement of expenditure or any payment request has been submitted.
Paragraph 2 of this Article shall also apply to annual instalments.
4.   By way of derogation from Article 209(3) of the Financial Regulation, repayments and revenues generated by a financial instrument and budgetary guarantees shall be assigned to the budget line of origin as internal assigned revenue after deduction of management costs and fees. Every five years, the Commission shall examine the contribution made to the achievement of Union objectives by, and the effectiveness of, existing financial instruments.
