Article 13
Programming principles for geographic programmes
1.   Programming of geographic programmes shall be based on the following principles:
(a)
without prejudice to paragraph 5, actions shall be based, to the extent possible, on an early, continuous and inclusive dialogue between the Union, Member States and the partner countries concerned, including national, regional and local authorities, involving civil society organisations, national, regional and local parliaments and other stakeholders, in order to enhance democratic ownership of the process and to encourage support for national and regional strategies;
(b)
where appropriate, the programming period shall be synchronised and aligned with the strategy cycles of partner countries;
(c)
programming may envisage cooperation activities funded from different allocations set out in Article 6(2) and from other Union programmes according to their basic acts.
2.   Programming of geographic programmes shall provide a specific, tailor-made framework for cooperation based on:
(a)
the partners’ needs, established on the basis of specific criteria, taking into account the population, poverty, inequality, human development, economic and environmental vulnerability, and state and societal resilience and the impact of protracted and recurrent crises;
(b)
the partners’ capacity and commitment to promote shared values, principles and interests, including human rights, fundamental freedoms, democracy, the rule of law, good governance, fight against corruption, open civic space and gender equality and to support common goals and multilateral alliances and cooperation, a rules-based international system, as well as the advancement of Union priorities;
(c)
the partners’ commitments, including those jointly agreed with the Union, and performance established on the basis of criteria such as political reform; and economic and social development, environmental sustainability, and the effective use of aid, taking into account the specificities and development level of partner countries;
(d)
the potential impact of Union funding in partner countries and regions;
(e)
the partners’ capacities to mobilise and make effective use of domestic resources as well as to access financial resources, to manage resources transparently in support of national development priorities and their absorption capacities.
3.   The countries most in need, in particular the LDCs, low income countries, countries in a situation of crisis, post-crisis, or fragility and vulnerability, including small islands developing states and landlocked developing countries, shall be given priority in the resource allocation process.
4.   In addition, the Union shall address the specific challenges of middle income countries and in particular countries that graduate from lower income status.
5.   Cooperation with industrialised countries shall focus on the promotion of Union and mutual interests and values, as well as commonly agreed objectives and multilateralism.
6.   The Instrument shall contribute to actions established under Regulation (EU) 2021/817. A single programming document shall be drawn up from this Regulation for seven years, including funds from the IPA III Regulation. Regulation (EU) 2021/817 shall apply to the use of those funds.
