Whereas:
(1)
The laws, regulations and administrative provisions in force in the Member States with regard to the placing on the market of pyrotechnic articles are divergent, in particular as regards aspects such as safety and performance characteristics.
(2)
Those laws, regulations and administrative provisions, being liable to cause barriers to trade within the Community, should be harmonised in order to guarantee the free movement of pyrotechnic articles within the internal market whilst ensuring a high level of protection of human health and safety and the protection of consumers and professional end users.
(3)
Council Directive 93/15/EEC of 5 April 1993 on the harmonisation of the provisions relating to the placing on the market and supervision of explosives for civil uses (3) excludes pyrotechnic articles from its scope and states that pyrotechnic articles require appropriate measures to ensure the protection of consumers and the safety of the public and that an additional directive is planned in this field.
(4)
Council Directive 96/82/EC of 9 December 1996 on the control of major-accident hazards involving dangerous substances (4) sets out safety requirements for establishments where explosives, including pyrotechnic substances, are present.
(5)
Pyrotechnic articles should include fireworks, theatrical pyrotechnic articles and pyrotechnic articles for technical purposes, such as gas generators used in airbags or in seatbelt pretensioners.
(6)
This Directive should not apply to pyrotechnic articles to which Council Directive 96/98/EC of 20 December 1996 on marine equipment (5) and the relevant international conventions mentioned therein apply.
(7)
In order to ensure appropriately high levels of protection, pyrotechnic articles should be categorised primarily according to their level of hazard as regards their type of use, purpose or noise level.
(8)
According to the principles set out in the Council Resolution of 7 May 1985 on a new approach to technical harmonisation and standards (6), a pyrotechnic article should comply with this Directive when the article is placed on the Community market for the first time. In view of religious, cultural and traditional festivities in the Member States, fireworks built by the manufacturer for his own use and which have been approved by a Member State for use on its territory should not be considered as having been placed on the market and should not therefore need to comply with this Directive.
(9)
Given the dangers inherent in the use of pyrotechnic articles, it is appropriate to lay down age limits for their sale to consumers and their use, and to ensure that their labelling displays sufficient and appropriate information on safe use, in order to protect human health and safety and the environment. Provision should be made for certain pyrotechnic articles to be made available only to authorised specialists with the necessary knowledge, skills and experience. With regard to pyrotechnic articles for vehicles, labelling requirements should take into account current practice and the fact that these articles are supplied exclusively to professional users.
(10)
The use of pyrotechnic articles and, in particular, the use of fireworks, is subject to markedly divergent cultural customs and traditions in the respective Member States. This makes it necessary to allow Member States to take national measures to limit the use or sale of certain categories of fireworks to the general public for reasons of public security or safety.
(11)
It is appropriate to establish essential safety requirements for pyrotechnic articles in order to protect consumers and to prevent accidents.
(12)
Responsibility for ensuring that pyrotechnic articles comply with this Directive and in particular with those essential safety requirements should rest with the manufacturer. If the manufacturer is not established in the Community, the natural or legal person who imports a pyrotechnic article into the Community should ensure that the manufacturer has fulfilled his obligations under this Directive or should assume all obligations of the manufacturer.
(13)
It should not be possible, where the essential safety requirements are satisfied, for Member States to prohibit, restrict or hinder the free movement of pyrotechnic articles. This Directive should apply without prejudice to national legislation on the licensing of manufacturers, distributors and importers by the Member States.
(14)
In order to facilitate the process of demonstrating compliance with the essential safety requirements, harmonised standards for the design, manufacture and testing of pyrotechnic articles are being developed.
(15)
European harmonised standards are drawn up, adopted and modified by the Committee for European Standardization (CEN), the Committee for Electro-technical Standardization (Cenelec) and the European Telecommunication Standards Institute (ETSI). These organisations are recognised as competent for the adoption of harmonised standards, which they draw up in accordance with the general guidelines for cooperation between themselves and the European Commission and the European Free Trade Association (7), and with the procedure laid down in Directive 98/34/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 June 1998 laying down a procedure for the provision of information in the field of technical standards and regulations and of rules on Information Society services (8). With regard to pyrotechnic articles for vehicles, the international orientation of the European vehicle supply industry should be reflected by taking into account the relevant international ISO standards.
(16)
In line with the ‘New Approach to technical harmonisation and standardisation’, pyrotechnic articles manufactured in compliance with harmonised standards should benefit from a presumption of conformity with the essential safety requirements provided for in this Directive.
(17)
By Decision 93/465/EEC of 22 July 1993 concerning the modules for the various phases of the conformity assessment procedures and the rules for the affixing and use of the CE conformity marking, which are intended to be used in the technical harmonisation directives (9), the Council introduced harmonised means of applying procedures for conformity assessment. The application of these modules to pyrotechnic articles will make it possible to determine the responsibility of manufacturers and of bodies involved in the conformity assessment procedure by taking account of the nature of the pyrotechnic articles concerned.
(18)
Groups of pyrotechnic articles that are similar in design, function or behaviour should be assessed by the notified bodies as product families.
(19)
In order to be placed on the market, pyrotechnic articles should bear a CE marking indicating their conformity with the provisions of this Directive to enable them to move freely within the Community.
(20)
According to the ‘New Approach to technical harmonisation and standardisation’, a safeguard clause procedure is necessary to allow the possibility for contesting the conformity of a pyrotechnic article or failures. Accordingly, Member States should take all appropriate measures to prohibit or restrict the placing on the market of products bearing a CE marking or to withdraw such products from the market if they endanger the health and safety of consumers when the products are used for their intended purpose.
(21)
As regards safety in transportation, the rules concerning the transport of pyrotechnic articles are covered by international conventions and agreements, including the United Nations recommendations on the transport of dangerous goods.
(22)
Member States should lay down rules on penalties applicable to infringements of the provisions of national law adopted pursuant to this Directive and ensure that these rules are implemented. The penalties provided for should be effective, proportionate and dissuasive.
(23)
It is in the interests of the manufacturer and the importer to supply safe products in order to avoid liability costs for defective products causing damage to individuals and private property. In this regard, Council Directive 85/374/EEC of 25 July 1985 on the approximation of the laws, regulations and administrative provisions of the Member States concerning liability for defective products (10) complements this Directive, since that Directive imposes a strict liability regime on manufactures and importers and ensures an adequate level of protection for consumers. Furthermore, this Directive provides that notified bodies should be adequately insured in respect of their professional activities, unless their liability is assumed by the State in accordance with national law, or the Member State itself is directly responsible for the tests.
(24)
It is vital to provide for a transitional period to allow national laws in specified fields to be adapted gradually. Manufacturers and importers need to be given time to exercise any rights under national rules in force before the entry into force of this Directive in order, for example, to sell their stocks of manufactured products. Furthermore, the specific transitional periods provided for for the application of this Directive would allow extra time for the adoption of harmonised standards and would ensure the speedy implementation of this Directive so as to enhance the protection of consumers.
(25)
Since the objectives of this Directive cannot be sufficiently achieved by the Member States and can therefore be better achieved at Community level, the Community may adopt measures, in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity as set out in Article 5 of the Treaty. In accordance with the principle of proportionality, as set out in that Article, this Directive does not go beyond what is necessary in order to achieve those objectives.
(26)
The measures necessary for the implementation of this Directive should be adopted in accordance with Council Decision 1999/468/EC of 28 June 1999 laying down the procedures for the exercise of implementing powers conferred on the Commission (11).
(27)
In particular, the Commission should be empowered to adopt Community measures concerning United Nations recommendations, the labelling requirements of pyrotechnic articles and adaptations to technical progress of Annexes II and III related to safety requirements and conformity assessment procedures. Since those measures are of general scope and are designed to amend non-essential elements of this Directive, or to supplement it by the addition of new non-essential elements, they must be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny provided for in Article 5a of Decision 1999/468/EC.
(28)
In accordance with point 34 of the Interinstitutional Agreement on better law-making (12), Member States are encouraged to draw up, for themselves and in the interests of the Community, their own tables illustrating, as far as possible, the correlation between this Directive and the transposition measures, and to make them public,
HAVE ADOPTED THIS DIRECTIVE:
