Article 12
Labelling of articles other than pyrotechnic articles for vehicles
1.   Manufacturers shall ensure that pyrotechnic articles other than pyrotechnic articles for vehicles are properly labelled visibly, legibly and indelibly in the official language(s) of the Member State in which the article is sold to the consumer.
2.   The labelling of pyrotechnic articles shall include as a minimum the name and address of the manufacturer or, where the manufacturer is not established in the Community, the name of the manufacturer and the name and address of the importer, the name and type of the article, the minimum age limits as indicated in Article 7(1) and (2), the relevant category and instructions for use, the year of production for category 3 and 4 fireworks and, where appropriate, a minimum safety distance. The labelling shall include the net equivalent quantity (NEQ) of active explosive material.
3.   In addition, fireworks shall display the following minimum information:
Category 1:
where appropriate: ‘for outdoor use only’ and a minimum safety distance.
Category 2:
‘for outdoor use only’ and, where appropriate, minimum safety distance(s).
Category 3:
‘for outdoor use only’ and minimum safety distance(s).
Category 4:
‘for use only by persons with specialist knowledge’ and minimum safety distance(s).
4.   In addition, theatrical pyrotechnic articles shall contain the following minimum information:
Category T1:
where appropriate: ‘for outdoor use only’ and a minimum safety distance.
Category T2:
‘for use only by persons with specialist knowledge’ and minimum safety distance(s).
5.   If the pyrotechnic article does not provide sufficient space for the labelling requirements referred to in paragraphs 2 to 4, the information shall be provided on the smallest piece of packaging.
6.   The provisions of this Article shall not apply to pyrotechnic articles shown at trade fairs, exhibitions and demonstrations for the marketing of pyrotechnic articles, as referred to in Article 6(3), or manufactured for the purpose of research, development and testing, as referred to in Article 6(4).
