Article 2
Definitions
For the purposes of this Directive:
1.
‘Pyrotechnic article’ means any article containing explosive substances or an explosive mixture of substances designed to produce heat, light, sound, gas or smoke or a combination of such effects through self-sustained exothermic chemical reactions.
2.
‘Placing on the market’ means the first making available on the Community market of an individual product, with a view to its distribution and/or use, whether for payment or free of charge. Fireworks built by a manufacturer for his own use and which have been approved by a Member State for use on its territory are not to be considered as having been placed on the market.
3.
‘Firework’ means a pyrotechnic article intended for entertainment purposes.
4.
‘Theatrical pyrotechnic articles’ means pyrotechnic articles designed for indoor or outdoor stage use, including film and television productions or similar use.
5.
‘Pyrotechnic articles for vehicles’ means components of safety devices in vehicles which contain pyrotechnic substances used to activate these or other devices.
6.
‘Manufacturer’ means a natural or legal person who designs and/or manufactures a pyrotechnic article, or who causes such an article to be designed and manufactured, with a view to placing it on the market under his own name or trademark.
7.
‘Importer’ means any natural or legal person established in the Community who makes a pyrotechnic article originating from a third country available on the Community market for the first time in the course of his business.
8.
‘Distributor’ means any natural or legal person in the supply chain who makes a pyrotechnic article available on the market in the course of his business.
9.
‘Harmonised standard’ means a European standard adopted by a European standardisation body under a mandate from the Commission in conformity with the procedures laid down in Directive 98/34/EC and with which compliance is not compulsory.
10.
‘Person with specialist knowledge’ means a person authorised by a Member State to handle and/or use on its territory category 4 fireworks, category T2 theatrical pyrotechnic articles and/or category P2 other pyrotechnic articles as defined in Article 3.
