Article 78
Revision of the thresholds
1.   The Commission shall verify the thresholds established in Article 7 every two years from the entry into force of this Directive and shall, if necessary, revise them in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 77(2).
The calculation of the value of these thresholds shall be based on the average daily value of the euro, expressed in SDRs, over the 24 months terminating on the last day of August preceding the revision with effect from 1 January. The value of the thresholds thus revised shall, where necessary, be rounded down to the nearest thousand euro so as to ensure that the thresholds in force provided for by the Agreement, expressed in SDRs, are observed.
2.   At the same time as the revision under paragraph 1, the Commission, in accordance with the procedure under Article 77(2), shall align:
(a)
the thresholds established in (a) of the first subparagraph of Article 8, in Article 56 and in the first subparagraph of Article 63(1) on the revised threshold applying to public works contracts;
(b)
the thresholds established in (b) of the first subparagraph of Article 8, and in Article 67(1)(a) on the revised threshold applying to public service contracts concluded by the contracting authorities referred to in Annex IV;
(c)
the threshold established in Article 67(1)(b) and (c) on the revised threshold applying to public service contracts awarded by the contracting authorities not included in Annex IV.
3.   The value of the thresholds set pursuant to paragraph 1 in the national currencies of the Member States which are not participating in monetary union is normally to be adjusted every two years from 1 January 2004 onwards. The calculation of such value shall be based on the average daily values of those currencies expressed in euro over the 24 months terminating on the last day of August preceding the revision with effect from 1 January.
4.   The revised thresholds referred to in paragraph 1 and their corresponding values in the national currencies referred to in paragraph 3 shall be published by the Commission in the Official Journal of the European Union at the beginning of the month of November following their revision.
