Article 36
Form and manner of publication of notices
1.   Notices shall include the information mentioned in Annex VII A and, where appropriate, any other information deemed useful by the contracting authority in the format of standard forms adopted by the Commission in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 77(2).
2.   Notices sent by contracting authorities to the Commission shall be sent either by electronic means in accordance with the format and procedures for transmission indicated in Annex VIII, paragraph 3, or by other means. In the event of recourse to the accelerated procedure set out in Article 38(8), notices must be sent either by telefax or by electronic means, in accordance with the format and procedures for transmission indicated in point 3 of Annex VIII.
Notices shall be published in accordance with the technical characteristics for publication set out in point 1(a) and (b) of Annex VIII.
3.   Notices drawn up and transmitted by electronic means in accordance with the format and procedures for transmission indicated in point 3 of Annex VIII, shall be published no later than five days after they are sent.
Notices which are not transmitted by electronic means in accordance with the format and procedures for transmission indicated in point 3 of Annex VIII, shall be published not later than 12 days after they are sent, or in the case of accelerated procedure referred to in Article 38(8), not later than five days after they are sent.
4.   Contract notices shall be published in full in an official language of the Community as chosen by the contracting authority, this original language version constituting the sole authentic text. A summary of the important elements of each notice shall be published in the other official languages.
The costs of publication of such notices by the Commission shall be borne by the Community.
5.   Notices and their contents may not be published at national level before the date on which they are sent to the Commission.
Notices published at national level shall not contain information other than that contained in the notices dispatched to the Commission or published on a buyer profile in accordance with the first subparagraph of Article 35(1), but shall mention the date of dispatch of the notice to the Commission or its publication on the buyer profile.
Prior information notices may not be published on a buyer profile before the dispatch to the Commission of the notice of their publication in that form; they shall mention the date of that dispatch.
6.   The content of notices not sent by electronic means in accordance with the format and procedures for transmission indicated in point 3 of Annex VIII, shall be limited to approximately 650 words.
7.   Contracting authorities must be able to supply proof of the dates on which notices are dispatched.
8.   The Commission shall give the contracting authority confirmation of the publication of the information sent, mentioning the date of that publication. Such confirmation shall constitute proof of publication.
