Article 24
Multiannual work programmes
1.   The Commission shall, by means of implementing acts, adopt multiannual work programmes for the LIFE Programme. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 30(2).
The duration of the first multiannual work programme shall be four years and the duration of the second multiannual work programme shall be three years.
2.   Each multiannual work programme shall specify, in line with the general objectives set out in Article 3, the following:
(a)
the allocation of funds between priority areas and between different types of funding within each sub-programme in conformity with Articles 9(3), 17(4) and 17(5). No further pre-allocation for project action grants between or within each priority area shall take place, with the exception of technical assistance projects and capacity-building projects;
(b)
the project topics implementing the thematic priorities set out in Annex III for projects to be financed for the period covered by the multiannual work programme;
(c)
qualitative and quantitative outcomes, indicators and targets for each priority area and type of projects for the period covered by the multiannual work programme in accordance with the performance indicators pursuant to Article 3(3) and the specific objectives set out for each priority area in Articles 10, 11, 12, 14, 15 and 16;
(d)
the technical methodology for the project selection procedure and selection and award criteria for grants in conformity with Articles 2 and 19 of this Regulation and the relevant provisions of Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012;
(e)
indicative timetables for the calls for proposals for the period covered by the multiannual work programme.
3.   In the framework of the multiannual work programmes the Commission shall publish annual calls for proposals for the priority areas listed in Article 9(1) and Article 13. The Commission shall ensure that unused funds in a given call for proposals are reallocated between the different types of projects referred to in Article 18.
4.   The Commission shall, by means of an implementing act, review the multiannual work programme at the latest by the mid-term evaluation of the LIFE Programme. That implementing act shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 30(2).
