Article 27
Monitoring and evaluation
1.   The Commission shall regularly monitor and report on the implementation of the LIFE Programme (and its sub-programmes), including the amount of climate-related expenditure and biodiversity-related expenditure. It shall also assess synergies between the LIFE Programme and other complementary Union programmes, and in particular between its sub-programmes. The Commission shall calculate indicative national allocations, in accordance with the criteria set out in Annex I, for the duration of the second multiannual work programme exclusively for the purposes of benchmarking Member States' performance.
2.   The Commission shall submit to the European Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions the following reports:
(a)
no later than 30 June 2017, an external and independent mid-term evaluation report of the LIFE Programme (and its sub-programmes), including qualitative and quantitative aspects of its implementation, the amount of climate-related expenditure and biodiversity-related expenditure, the extent to which synergies between the objectives have been reached, and its complementarity with other relevant Union programmes, the achievement of the objectives of all the measures (at the level of results and impacts, when possible), the efficiency of the use of resources and the Union added value of the Programme, with a view to taking a decision on the renewal, modification or suspension of the measures. That mid-term evaluation report shall also include a quantitative and qualitative analysis of the contribution of the LIFE Programme to the conservation status of habitats and species listed under Directives 92/43/EEC and 2009/147/EC. The evaluation shall additionally address the scope for simplification, its internal and external coherence, the continued relevance of all objectives, as well as the contribution of the measures under the LIFE Programme to the Europe 2020 Strategy objectives and targets and to sustainable development. It shall take into account evaluation results on the long-term impact of LIFE+. The mid-term evaluation report shall be accompanied by remarks by the Commission including the manner in which the findings of the mid-term evaluation shall be taken into account when implementing the LIFE Programme, and, in particular, the extent to which the thematic priorities set out in Annex III need to be modified.
The mid-term evaluation report shall contain or be accompanied by a thorough assessment of the extent and quality of the demand for, planning and implementation of integrated projects. A special focus shall be given to the realised or expected success of integrated projects in leveraging other Union funds, taking into account, in particular, the benefits of increased coherence with other Union funding instruments, the extent to which stakeholders have been involved and the extent to which previous projects under LIFE+ have been or are expected to be covered by integrated projects.
(b)
no later than 31 December 2023, an external and independent ex-post evaluation report covering the implementation and results of the LIFE Programme (and its sub-programmes), including the amount of climate-related expenditure and biodiversity-related expenditure, the extent to which the LIFE Programme as a whole, and each of its sub-programmes, has achieved its objectives, the extent to which synergies between the various objectives have been realised, and the contribution of the LIFE Programme to achieving the Europe 2020 Strategy objectives and targets. The ex-post evaluation report shall also examine the extent to which integration of environment and climate objectives into other Union policies has been achieved and, to the extent possible, the economic benefit achieved through the LIFE Programme as well as the impact and added value for the communities involved.
3.   The Commission shall make the results of the evaluations undertaken pursuant to this Article publicly available.
