Article 9
Priority areas of the sub-programme for Environment
1.   The sub-programme for Environment shall have three priority areas:
(a)
Environment and Resource Efficiency;
(b)
Nature and Biodiversity;
(c)
Environmental Governance and Information.
2.   The priority areas referred to in paragraph 1 encompass the thematic priorities set out in Annex III.
The Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts, where necessary, in accordance with Article 29 to add, delete or amend the thematic priorities set out in Annex III based on the following criteria:
(a)
the priorities set out in the 7th Environment Action Programme;
(b)
the specific objectives set out for each priority area referred to in Articles 10, 11 and 12;
(c)
the experience gathered in the implementation of the multiannual work programme referred to in Article 24;
(d)
the experience gathered in the implementation of the integrated projects;
(e)
the priorities derived from new Union environmental legislation adopted after 23 December 2013; or
(f)
the experience gathered in the implementation of existing Union environmental legislation and policy.
The Commission shall review and, if necessary, revise the thematic priorities set out in Annex III at the latest by the mid-term evaluation of the LIFE Programme referred to in point (a) of Article 27(2).
3.   At least 55 % of the budgetary resources allocated to projects supported by way of action grants under the sub-programme for Environment shall be dedicated to projects supporting the conservation of nature and biodiversity.
4.   The Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 29 in order to increase the percentage referred to in paragraph 3 of this Article by a maximum of 10 %, provided that the total funds requested over two consecutive years by way of proposals that fall under the priority area of Nature and Biodiversity and that meet minimum quality requirements exceed by more than 20 % the corresponding amount calculated for the two years preceding those years.
