Article 11
1.   Paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 shall apply only to programmes produced after 19 December 2009.
2.   Product placement shall be prohibited.
3.   By way of derogation from paragraph 2, product placement shall be admissible in the following cases unless a Member State decides otherwise:
(a)
in cinematographic works, films and series made for audiovisual media services, sports programmes and light entertainment programmes;
(b)
where there is no payment but only the provision of certain goods or services free of charge, such as production props and prizes, with a view to their inclusion in a programme.
The derogation provided for in point (a) shall not apply to children’s programmes.
Programmes that contain product placement shall meet at least all of the following requirements:
(a)
their content and, in the case of television broadcasting, their scheduling shall in no circumstances be influenced in such a way as to affect the responsibility and editorial independence of the media service provider;
(b)
they shall not directly encourage the purchase or rental of goods or services, in particular by making special promotional references to those goods or services;
(c)
they shall not give undue prominence to the product in question;
(d)
viewers shall be clearly informed of the existence of product placement. Programmes containing product placement shall be appropriately identified at the start and the end of the programme, and when a programme resumes after an advertising break, in order to avoid any confusion on the part of the viewer.
By way of exception, Member States may choose to waive the requirements set out in point (d) provided that the programme in question has neither been produced nor commissioned by the media service provider itself or a company affiliated to the media service provider.
4.   In any event programmes shall not contain product placement of:
(a)
tobacco products or cigarettes or product placement from undertakings whose principal activity is the manufacture or sale of cigarettes and other tobacco products;
(b)
specific medicinal products or medical treatments available only on prescription in the Member State under whose jurisdiction the media service provider falls.
