Article 10
Review
1. The reports referred to in Article 9 shall take into account the factors listed in Article 9(1). In the light of these factors, of progress towards attaining the emission ceilings by the year 2010, of scientific and technical progress, and of the situation regarding progress towards attaining the interim objectives of this Directive and the long-term objectives of no exceedance of critical loads and levels and of WHO air quality guidelines for ozone, the Commission shall carry out a review of this Directive in preparation for each report.
2. In the review to be completed in 2004 an evaluation will be carried out of the indicative emission ceilings for the Community as a whole set out in Annex II. The evaluation of these indicative ceilings shall be a factor for consideration during analysis of further cost-effective actions that might be taken in order to reduce emissions of all relevant pollutants, with the aim of attaining the interim environmental objectives set out in Article 5, for the Community as a whole by 2010.
3. All reviews shall include a further investigation of the estimated costs and benefits of national emission ceilings, computed with state-of-the-art models and making use of the best available data to achieve the least possible uncertainty and taking also into account progress in the enlargement of the European Union, and of the merits of alternative methodologies, in the light of the factors listed in Article 9.
4. Without prejudice to Article 18 of Directive 96/61/EC, with the aim of avoiding distortion of competition, and taking into account the balance between benefits and costs of action, the Commission shall examine further the need to develop harmonised Community measures, for the most relevant economic sectors and products contributing to acidification, eutrophication and formation of ground-level ozone.
5. The reports referred to in Article 9 will, if appropriate, be accompanied by proposals for:
(a) modifications of the national ceilings in Annex I with the aim of meeting the interim environmental objectives of Article 5 and/or for modifications to those interim environmental objectives;
(b) possible further emission reductions with the aim of meeting, preferably by 2020, the long-term objectives of this Directive;
(c) measures to ensure compliance with the ceilings.

