Article 34
Safety Gate Portal
1.   For the purpose of Article 9(9), Articles 20 and 22, Article 31(5) and Article 33(1), the Commission shall maintain a Safety Gate Portal, providing the general public with free of charge and open access to selected information notified in accordance with Article 26 (the ‘Safety Gate Portal’).
2.   The Safety Gate Portal shall have an interface which is intuitive for users and the information provided on that portal shall be easily accessible by the public, including by persons with disabilities.
3.   Consumers and other interested parties shall have the possibility to inform the Commission of products that might present a risk to the health and safety of consumers through a separate section of the Safety Gate Portal. The Commission shall give due consideration to the information received and, after verification of its accuracy, where appropriate, forward that information to the relevant Member States without undue delay to ensure that that information is appropriately followed-up. The Commission shall inform consumers and other interested parties of its action.
4.   The Commission shall, by means of an implementing act, adopt the modalities for the sending of information by consumers in accordance with paragraph 3, as well as for the transmission of such information to the national authorities concerned for possible follow up. This implementing act shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 46(3).
5.   By 13 December 2024 the Commission shall develop an interoperable interface that allows providers of online marketplaces to link their interfaces to the Safety Gate Portal.
6.   The Commission shall adopt implementing acts specifying the implementation of the interoperable interface on the Safety Gate Portal in accordance with paragraph 5, in particular concerning the access to the system and its operation. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 46(3).
