Article 28
Union action against products presenting a serious risk
1.   If the Commission becomes aware of a product, or a specific category or group of products, presenting a serious risk to the health and safety of consumers, it may take any appropriate measures, either on its own initiative or upon request of Member States, by means of implementing acts, adapted to the gravity and urgency of the situation if:
(a)
the risk cannot be dealt with, in view of the nature of the safety issue posed by the product, category or group of products, in a manner compatible with the degree of gravity or urgency of the case, under other procedures laid down by the specific Union law applicable to the products concerned; and
(b)
the risk can be eliminated in an effective manner only by adopting appropriate measures applicable at Union level, in order to ensure a consistent and high level of protection of the health and safety of consumers and the proper functioning of the internal market.
Those measures may include measures prohibiting, suspending or restricting the placing or making available on the market of such products or laying down special conditions for their conformity assessment with regard to the safety requirement, as applicable, or for their marketing, such as representative sample testing of those products, in order to ensure a high level of consumer safety protection.
Member States shall, within their jurisdiction, take all appropriate enforcement measures necessary to ensure the effective implementation of those implementing acts. The competent authorities of the Member States concerned shall inform the Commission of the enforcement measures taken.
The Commission shall regularly evaluate the efficiency of the enforcement measures taken by Member States and inform the Consumer Safety Network of the outcome of that evaluation.
2.   The implementing acts referred to in the paragraph 1 shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 46(3). Those implementing acts shall specify the date on which they will cease to apply.
3.   On duly justified imperative grounds of urgency relating to the health and safety of consumers the Commission may adopt immediately applicable implementing acts in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 46(4).
4.   The export from the Union of a product that has been prohibited to be placed or made available on the Union market pursuant to a measure adopted in accordance with paragraph 1 or paragraph 3 shall be prohibited, unless the measure expressly so permits for duly justified reasons.
5.   Any Member State may submit a substantiated request to the Commission to examine the need for the adoption of a measure referred to in paragraph 1 or paragraph 3.
