Article 30
Consumer Safety Network
1.   A European network of the authorities of the Member States competent for product safety (the ‘Consumer Safety Network’) is hereby established.
The purpose of the Consumer Safety Network shall be to serve as a platform for structured coordination and cooperation between authorities of the Member States and the Commission in enhancing product safety in the Union.
2.   The Commission shall promote and take part in the operation of the Consumer Safety Network, in particular in the form of administrative cooperation.
3.   The tasks of the Consumer Safety Network shall be, in particular, to:
(a)
facilitate the regular exchange of information on risk assessments, dangerous products, test methods and results, standards, methodologies for the collection of data, interoperability of information and communication systems, recent scientific developments and the use of new technologies as well as other aspects relevant for control activities;
(b)
organise the establishment and execution of joint surveillance and testing projects, including in the context of e-commerce;
(c)
promote the exchange of expertise and best practices and cooperation in training activities;
(d)
improve cooperation at Union level with regard to the tracing, withdrawal and recall of dangerous products;
(e)
facilitate enhanced and structured cooperation on product safety enforcement between Member States, in particular to facilitate the activities referred to in Article 32; and
(f)
facilitate the implementation of this Regulation.
4.   The Consumer Safety Network shall coordinate its action with the other existing Union activities related to market surveillance and consumer safety and, where relevant, shall cooperate and exchange information with other Union networks, groups and bodies.
5.   The Consumer Safety Network shall adopt its work programme, which, inter alia, shall set out the priorities for safety of the products and for the risks covered by this Regulation, in the Union.
The Consumer Safety Network shall meet at regular intervals and, where necessary, at the duly justified request of the Commission or a Member State.
The Consumer Safety Network may invite experts and other third parties, including consumer organisations, to attend its meetings.
6.   The Consumer Safety Network shall be duly represented and regularly participate in the relevant activities of the Union Product Compliance Network established under Article 29 of Regulation (EU) 2019/1020 and shall contribute to its activities in relation to product safety to ensure adequate coordination of market surveillance activities in both harmonised and non-harmonised areas.
