Article 47
Evaluation and review
1.   By 13 December 2029 the Commission shall carry out an evaluation of this Regulation. The Commission shall submit to the European Parliament, the Council and to the European Economic and Social Committee a report on the main findings. That report shall assess whether this Regulation, and in particular Articles 18, 22 and 25, achieved the objective of enhancing the protection of consumers against dangerous products while taking into account the challenges posed by new technologies and its impact on businesses and in particular on SMEs.
2.   By 13 December 2029, the Commission shall draw up an evaluation report on the implementation of Article 16. That report shall in particular assess the scope, effects, and costs and benefits of that Article. The report shall be accompanied, where appropriate, by a legislative proposal.
3.   By 13 December 2027 the Commission shall assess the modalities for implementation of the provisions on the removal of illegal content from online marketplaces referred to in Article 22(4), (5) and (6) by means of a Union notification system designed and developed within the Safety Gate Portal. Such assessment shall be accompanied, where appropriate, by a legislative proposal.
4.   By 13 December 2026 the Commission shall publish a report on the functioning of the interconnection between information and communication system referred to in Article 34 of Regulation (EU) 2019/1020 and the Safety Gate Portal referred to in this Regulation, including information on their respective functionalities, further improvements or on the development of a new interface, if appropriate.
5.   By 13 December 2029, the Commission shall draw up an evaluation report on the implementation of Article 44. That report shall in particular assess the effectiveness and deterrent effect of the penalties imposed under that Article. The report shall be accompanied, where appropriate, by a legislative proposal.
6.   On request, Member States shall provide the Commission with information necessary for the evaluation of this Regulation.
