Article 35
Information from economic operators and providers of online marketplaces to consumers on product safety
1.   In the case of a product safety recall, or where certain information has to be brought to the attention of consumers to ensure the safe use of a product (‘safety warning’), economic operators, in accordance with their respective obligations as provided for in Articles 9, 10, 11 and 12, and providers of online marketplaces in accordance with their obligations as provided for in Article 22(12), shall ensure that all affected consumers that can be identified are notified directly and without undue delay. Economic operators and, where applicable, providers of online marketplaces that collect their customers’ personal data shall make use of that information for recalls and safety warnings.
2.   Where economic operators and providers of online marketplaces have in place product registration systems or customer loyalty programs enabling the identification of products bought by consumers for purposes other than contacting their customers with safety information, they shall offer the possibility to their customers to provide separate contact details only for safety-related purposes. The personal data collected for that purpose shall be limited to the necessary minimum and shall only be used to contact consumers in the event of a recall or safety warning.
3.   The Commission may, by means of implementing acts, set out, for specific products or categories of products, requirements to be met by economic operators and providers of online marketplaces to provide the possibility for consumers to register a product they have purchased in order to be notified directly in the case of a product safety recall or safety warning in relation to that product, in accordance with paragraph 1 of this Article. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 46(3).
4.   Where not all of the affected consumers can be contacted under paragraph 1, economic operators and providers of online marketplaces, in accordance with their respective responsibilities, shall disseminate a clear and visible recall notice or safety warning through other appropriate channels, ensuring the widest possible reach including, where available, the company’s website, social media channels, newsletters and retail outlets and, as appropriate, announcements in mass media and other communication channels. Information shall be accessible to persons with disabilities.
