Article 34
Consent to further dissemination of information exchanged between FIUs
1.   Member States shall ensure that the information exchanged pursuant to Articles 29, 31 and 32 is used only for the purpose for which it was sought or provided and that any dissemination of that information by the receiving FIU to any other authority, agency or department, or any use of this information for purposes other than those originally approved, is made subject to the prior consent by the FIU providing the information.
The requirements of the first subparagraph of this paragraph shall not apply where the information provided by the FIU consists of a report submitted by an obliged entity pursuant to Article 69(1) of Regulation (EU) 2024/1624 which concerns another Member State where the obliged entity operates through the freedom to provide services and which has no link to the Member State of the FIU providing the information.
2.   Member States shall ensure that the requested FIU’s prior consent to disseminate the information to competent authorities is granted promptly and to the largest extent possible, regardless of the type of predicate offences and whether or not the predicate offence has been identified. The requested FIU shall not refuse its consent to such dissemination unless this would fall beyond the scope of application of its AML/CFT provisions or could lead to impairment of an investigation, or would otherwise not be in accordance with fundamental principles of national law of that Member State. Any such refusal to grant consent shall be appropriately explained. The cases where FIUs may refuse to grant consent shall be specified in a way which prevents misuse of, and undue limitations to, the dissemination of information to competent authorities.
3.   By 10 July 2028, Member States shall notify to the Commission the exceptional circumstances in which dissemination would not be in accordance with fundamental principles of national law referred to in paragraph 2. Member States shall update such notifications where changes to the exceptional circumstances identified at national level occur.
The Commission shall publish the consolidated list of notifications referred to in the first subparagraph.
4.   By 10 July 2029, the Commission shall submit a report to the European Parliament and to the Council assessing whether the exceptional circumstances notified pursuant to paragraph 3 are justified.
