Article 6
Checks on the senior management and beneficial owners of certain obliged entities
1.   Member States shall require supervisors to verify that the members of the senior management in the obliged entities referred to in Article 4(1) and (2) as well as financial mixed activity holding companies, and the beneficial owners of such entities are of good repute, and act with honesty and integrity. Senior management of such entities shall also possess the knowledge and expertise necessary to carry out their functions.
2.   With respect to the obliged entities referred to in Article 3, points (3)(a), (b), (d), (e), (f) and (h) to (o), of Regulation (EU) 2024/1624, Member States shall ensure that supervisors take the necessary measures to prevent persons convicted of money laundering, its relevant predicate offences or terrorist financing or their associates from being professionally accredited, from holding a senior management function in or from being the beneficial owners of those obliged entities.
3.   Member States shall ensure that supervisors verify, on a risk-sensitive basis, whether the requirements of paragraphs 1 and 2 continue to be met. In particular, they shall verify whether the senior management of obliged entities referred to in paragraph 1 is of good repute, acts with honesty and integrity and possesses knowledge and expertise necessary to carry out its functions in cases where there are reasonable grounds to suspect that money laundering or terrorist financing is being or has been committed or attempted, or there is increased risk thereof in an obliged entity.
4.   Member States shall ensure that supervisors have the power to request the removal of any person convicted of money laundering, its relevant predicate offences or terrorist financing, from the senior management of obliged entities as referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2. Member States shall ensure that supervisors have the power to remove or impose a temporary ban on members of the senior management of the obliged entities referred to in paragraph 1 that are not deemed to be of good repute, act with honesty and integrity or possess the knowledge and expertise necessary to carry out their functions.
5.   Member States shall ensure that supervisors have the power to disassociate persons convicted of money laundering, its relevant predicate offences or terrorist financing, who are beneficial owners of obliged entities as referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2, from obliged entities, including by granting supervisors the power to request the divestment of the holding by those beneficial owners in obliged entities.
6.   For the purposes of this Article, Member States shall ensure that, in accordance with national law, supervisors or any other authority competent at national level for assessing the requirements applicable to persons referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article, check the central AML/CFT database under Article 11 of Regulation (EU) 2024/1620 and whether a relevant conviction exists in the criminal record of the person concerned. Any exchange of information for those purposes shall be carried out in accordance with Framework Decision 2009/315/JHA and Decision 2009/316/JHA as implemented in national law.
7.   Member States shall ensure that decisions taken by supervisors pursuant to this Article are subject to effective remedial procedures, including judicial remedy.
8.   By 10 July 2029, AMLA shall issue guidelines on:
(a)
the criteria to assess good repute, honesty and integrity as referred to in paragraph 1;
(b)
the criteria to assess knowledge and expertise as referred to in paragraph 1;
(c)
the consistent application by supervisors of the power entrusted to them under this Article.
When drawing up the guidelines referred to in the first subparagraph, AMLA shall take into account the specificities of each sector in which the obliged entities operate.
9.   Member States shall apply this Article in relation to the obliged entities referred to in Article 3, points 3(n) and (o) of Regulation (EU) 2024/1624 from 10 July 2029.
