Article 64
Cooperation in relation to credit institutions or financial institutions
1.   Member States shall ensure that financial supervisors, FIUs, and authorities competent for the supervision of credit institutions or financial institutions under other Union legal acts, cooperate closely with each other within their respective competences and provide each other with information relevant for the performance of their respective tasks. Such cooperation and information exchange shall not impinge on any ongoing inquiry, FIU analysis, investigation or proceedings in accordance with the criminal or administrative law of the Member State where the financial supervisor or authority entrusted with competences for the supervision of credit institutions or financial institutions under other legal acts is located and shall not affect professional secrecy requirements as provided in Article 67(1).
2.   Member States shall ensure that, where financial supervisors identify weaknesses in the AML/CFT internal control system and application of the requirements of Regulation (EU) 2024/1624 of a credit institution which materially increase the risks to which the institution is or might be exposed, the financial supervisor immediately notifies the European Banking Authority (EBA) and the authority or body that supervises the credit institution in accordance with Directive 2013/36/EU, including the ECB acting in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 1024/2013.
In the event of potential increased risk, financial supervisors shall be able to cooperate and share information with the authorities supervising the institution in accordance with Directive 2013/36/EU and draw up a common assessment to be notified to EBA by the supervisor who first sent the notification. AMLA shall be kept informed of any such notifications.
3.   Member States shall ensure that, where financial supervisors find that a credit institution has refused to establish or decided to terminate a business relationship but the documented customer due diligence pursuant to Article 21(3) of Regulation (EU) 2024/1624 does not justify such refusal, they shall inform the authority responsible for ensuring compliance by that credit institution with Directives 2014/92/EU or (EU) 2015/2366.
4.   Member States shall ensure that financial supervisors cooperate with resolution authorities as defined in Article 2(1), point (18), of Directive 2014/59/EU or designated authorities as defined in Article 2(1), point (18), of Directive 2014/49/EU.
Financial supervisors shall inform the authorities referred to in the first subparagraph where, in the exercise of their supervisory activities, they identify, on AML/CFT grounds, any of the following situations:
(a)
an increased likelihood of deposits becoming unavailable;
(b)
a risk that a credit institution or a financial institution be deemed to be failing or likely to fail in accordance with Article 32(4) of Directive 2014/59/EU.
Upon request by the authorities referred to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph, where there is an increased likelihood of deposits becoming unavailable or a risk that a credit institution or a financial institution be deemed to be failing or likely to fail in accordance with Article 32(4) of Directive 2014/59/EU, financial supervisors shall inform those authorities of any transaction, account or business relationship under management by that credit institution or financial institution that has been suspended by the FIU pursuant to Article 24.
5.   Financial supervisors shall report on an annual basis to AMLA on their cooperation with other authorities pursuant to this Article including involvement of FIUs in that cooperation.
6.   By 10 July 2029, AMLA shall, in consultation with EBA, issue guidelines on cooperation between financial supervisors and the authorities referred to in paragraphs 2, 3 and 4, including on the level of involvement of FIUs in such cooperation.
