Article 3
Identification of exposed sectors at national level
1.   Where a Member State identifies that, in addition to obliged entities, entities in other sectors are exposed to money laundering and terrorist financing risks, it may decide to apply all or part of Regulation (EU) 2024/1624 to those additional entities.
2.   For the purposes of paragraph 1, Member States shall notify the Commission of their intention to apply all or part of Regulation (EU) 2024/1624 to entities in other sectors. Such notification shall be accompanied by:
(a)
a justification of the money laundering and terrorist financing risks underpinning such intention;
(b)
an assessment of the impact that such application will have on the provision of services within the internal market;
(c)
the requirements of Regulation (EU) 2024/1624 that the Member State intends to apply to those entities;
(d)
the text of the draft national measures, as well as any update thereof where the Member State has significantly altered the scope, content or implementation of those notified measures.
3.   Member States shall postpone the adoption of national measures for 6 months from the date of the notification referred to in paragraph 2.
The postponement referred to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph shall not apply in cases where the national measure aims at addressing a serious and present threat of money laundering or terrorist financing. In that case, the notification referred to in paragraph 2 shall be accompanied by a justification as to why the Member State will not postpone its adoption.
4.   Before the end of the period referred to in paragraph 3, the Commission, having consulted the Authority for Anti-Money Laundering and Countering the Financing of Terrorism established by Regulation (EU) 2024/1620 (AMLA), shall issue a detailed opinion regarding whether the measure envisaged:
(a)
is adequate to address the risks identified, in particular as regards whether the risks identified by the Member State concern the internal market;
(b)
may create obstacles to the free movement of services or capital or to the freedom of establishment of service providers within the internal market which are not proportionate to the money laundering and terrorist financing risks the measure aims to mitigate.
The detailed opinion referred to in the first subparagraph shall also indicate whether the Commission intends to propose action at Union level.
5.   Where the Commission does not consider it appropriate to propose action at Union level, the Member State concerned shall, within 2 months of receiving the detailed opinion referred to in paragraph 4, report to the Commission on the action it proposes in relation thereto. The Commission shall comment on the action proposed by the Member State.
6.   Where the Commission indicates its intention to propose action at Union level in accordance with paragraph 4, second subparagraph, the Member State concerned shall abstain from adopting the national measures referred to in paragraph 2, point (d), unless those national measures aim at addressing a serious and present threat of money laundering or terrorist financing.
7.   Where, on 9 July 2024, Member States have already applied national provisions transposing Directive (EU) 2015/849 to other sectors than obliged entities, they may apply all or part of Regulation (EU) 2024/1624 to those sectors.
By 10 January 2028, Member States shall notify the Commission of the sectors identified at national level pursuant to the first subparagraph of this paragraph to which the requirements of Regulation (EU) 2024/1624 apply, accompanied by a justification of the exposure of those sectors to money laundering and terrorist financing risks. Within 6 months of such notification, the Commission having consulted AMLA, shall issue a detailed opinion pursuant to paragraph 4. Where the Commission does not consider it appropriate to propose action at Union level, paragraph 5 shall apply.
8.   By 10 July 2028 and every year thereafter, the Commission shall publish a consolidated list of the sectors to which Member States have decided to apply all or part of Regulation (EU) 2024/1624 in the Official Journal of the European Union.
