Article 26
Penalties
1.   An authorised CBAM declarant who fails to surrender, by 31 May of each year, the number of CBAM certificates that corresponds to the emissions embedded in goods imported during the preceding calendar year shall be held liable for the payment of a penalty. Such a penalty shall be identical to the excess emissions penalty set out in Article 16(3) of Directive 2003/87/EC and increased pursuant to Article 16(4) of that Directive, applicable in the year of importation of the goods. Such a penalty shall apply for each CBAM certificate that the authorised CBAM declarant has not surrendered.
2.   Where a person other than an authorised CBAM declarant introduces goods into the customs territory of the Union without complying with the obligations under this Regulation, that person shall be held liable for the payment of a penalty. Such a penalty shall be effective, proportionate and dissuasive and shall, depending in particular on the duration, gravity, scope, intentional nature and repetition of such non-compliance and the level of cooperation of the person with the competent authority, be an amount from three to five times the penalty referred to in paragraph 1, applicable in the year of introduction of the goods, for each CBAM certificate that the person has not surrendered.
3.   The payment of the penalty shall not release the authorised CBAM declarant from the obligation to surrender the outstanding number of CBAM certificates in a given year.
4.   If the competent authority determines, including in light of the preliminary calculations made by the Commission in accordance with Article 19, that an authorised CBAM declarant has failed to comply with the obligation to surrender CBAM certificates as set out in paragraph 1 of this Article, or that a person has introduced goods into the customs territory of the Union without complying with the obligations under this Regulation as set out in paragraph 2 of this Article, the competent authority shall impose the penalty pursuant to paragraph 1 or 2 of this Article, as applicable. To that end, the competent authority shall notify the authorised CBAM declarant or, where paragraph 2 of this Article applies, the person:
(a)
that the competent authority has concluded that the authorised CBAM declarant or the person referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article failed to comply with the obligations under this Regulation;
(b)
of the reasons for its conclusion;
(c)
of the amount of the penalty imposed on the authorised CBAM declarant or on the person referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article;
(d)
of the date from which the penalty is due;
(e)
of the action that the authorised CBAM declarant or the person referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article is to take to pay the penalty; and
(f)
of the right of the authorised CBAM declarant or of the person referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article to appeal.
5.   Where the penalty has not been paid by the due date referred to in paragraph 4, point (d), the competent authority shall secure payment of that penalty by all means available to it under the national law of the Member State concerned.
6.   Member States shall communicate the decisions on penalties referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 to the Commission and shall register the final payment referred to in paragraph 5 in the CBAM registry.
