Article 19
Review of CBAM declarations
1.   The Commission shall have the oversight role in the review of CBAM declarations.
2.   The Commission may review CBAM declarations, in accordance with a review strategy, including risk factors, within the period ending with the fourth year after the year during which the CBAM declarations should have been submitted.
The review may consist in verifying the information provided in the CBAM declaration and in verification reports on the basis of the information communicated by the customs authorities in accordance with Article 25, any other relevant evidence, and on the basis of any audit deemed necessary, including at the premises of the authorised CBAM declarant.
The Commission shall communicate the initiation and the results of the review to the competent authority of the Member State where the CBAM declarant is established, via the CBAM registry.
The competent authority of the Member State where the authorised CBAM declarant is established may also review a CBAM declaration within the period referred to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph. The competent authority shall communicate the initiation and the results of a review to the Commission, via the CBAM registry.
3.   The Commission shall periodically set out specific risk factors and points for attention, based on a risk analysis in relation to the implementation of the CBAM at Union level, taking into account information contained in the CBAM registry, data communicated by customs authorities, and other relevant information sources, including the controls and checks carried out pursuant to Article 15(2) and Article 25.
The Commission shall also facilitate the exchange of information with competent authorities about fraudulent activities and the penalties imposed in accordance with Article 26.
4.   Where an authorised CBAM declarant fails to submit a CBAM declaration in accordance with Article 6, or where the Commission considers, on the basis of its review under paragraph 2 of this Article, that the declared number of CBAM certificates is incorrect, the Commission shall assess the obligations under this Regulation of that authorised CBAM declarant on the basis of the information at its disposal. The Commission shall establish a preliminary calculation of the total number of CBAM certificates which should have been surrendered, at the latest by the 31 December of the year following that in which the CBAM declaration should have been submitted, or at the latest by 31 December of the fourth year following that in which the incorrect CBAM declaration has been submitted, as applicable. The Commission shall provide to competent authorities such a preliminary calculation, for indicative purposes and without prejudice to the definitive calculation established by the competent authority of the Member State where the authorised CBAM declarant is established.
5.   Where the competent authority concludes that the declared number of CBAM certificates to be surrendered is incorrect, or that no CBAM declaration has been submitted in accordance with Article 6, it shall determine the number of CBAM certificates which should have been surrendered by the authorised CBAM declarant, taking into account the information submitted by the Commission.
The competent authority shall notify the authorised CBAM declarant of its decision on the number of CBAM certificates determined and shall request that the authorised CBAM declarant surrender the additional CBAM certificates within one month.
The competent authority’s decision shall contain the reasons for the decision as well as information about the right to appeal. The decision shall also be notified via the CBAM registry.
Where the competent authority, after receiving the preliminary calculation from the Commission in accordance with paragraphs 2 and 4 of this Article, decides not to take any action, the competent authority shall inform the Commission accordingly, via the CBAM registry.
6.   Where the competent authority concludes that the number of CBAM certificates surrendered exceeds the number which should have been surrendered, it shall inform the Commission without delay. The CBAM certificates surrendered in excess shall be repurchased in accordance with Article 23.
