Article 9
Carbon price paid in a third country
1.   An authorised CBAM declarant may claim in the CBAM declaration a reduction in the number of CBAM certificates to be surrendered in order to take into account the carbon price paid in the country of origin for the declared embedded emissions. The reduction may be claimed only if the carbon price has been effectively paid in the country of origin. In such a case, any rebate or other form of compensation available in that country that would have resulted in a reduction of that carbon price shall be taken into account.
2.   The authorised CBAM declarant shall keep records of the documentation required to demonstrate that the declared embedded emissions were subject to a carbon price in the country of origin of the goods that has been effectively paid as referred to in paragraph 1. The authorised CBAM declarant shall in particular keep evidence related to any rebate or other form of compensation available, in particular the references to the relevant legislation of that country. The information contained in that documentation shall be certified by a person that is independent from the authorised CBAM declarant and from the authorities of the country of origin. The name and contact information of that independent person shall appear on the documentation. The authorised CBAM declarant shall also keep evidence of the actual payment of the carbon price.
3.   The authorised CBAM declarant shall keep the records referred to in paragraph 2 until the end of the fourth year after the year during which the CBAM declaration has been or should have been submitted.
4.   The Commission is empowered to adopt implementing acts concerning the conversion of the yearly average carbon price effectively paid in accordance with paragraph 1 into a corresponding reduction of the number of CBAM certificates to be surrendered, including the conversion of the carbon price effectively paid in foreign currency into euro at the yearly average exchange rate, the evidence required of the actual payment of the carbon price, examples of any relevant rebate or other form of compensation referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article, the qualifications of the independent person referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article and the conditions to ascertain that person’s independence. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 29(2).
