Article 6
CBAM declaration
1.   By 31 May of each year, and for the first time in 2027 for the year 2026, each authorised CBAM declarant shall use the CBAM registry referred to in Article 14 to submit a CBAM declaration for the preceding calendar year.
2.   The CBAM declaration shall contain the following information:
(a)
the total quantity of each type of goods imported during the preceding calendar year, expressed in megawatt-hours for electricity and in tonnes for other goods;
(b)
the total embedded emissions in the goods referred to in point (a) of this paragraph, expressed in tonnes of CO2e emissions per megawatt-hour of electricity or, for other goods, in tonnes of CO2e emissions per tonne of each type of goods, calculated in accordance with Article 7 and verified in accordance with Article 8;
(c)
the total number of CBAM certificates to be surrendered, corresponding to the total embedded emissions referred to in point (b) of this paragraph after the reduction that is due on the account of the carbon price paid in a country of origin in accordance with Article 9 and the adjustment necessary to reflect the extent to which EU ETS allowances are allocated free of charge in accordance with Article 31;
(d)
copies of verification reports, issued by accredited verifiers, under Article 8 and Annex VI.
3.   Where processed products resulting from an inward processing procedure as referred to in Article 256 of Regulation (EU) No 952/2013 are imported, the authorised CBAM declarant shall report in the CBAM declaration the emissions embedded in the goods that were placed under the inward processing procedure and resulted in the imported processed products, even where the processed products are not goods listed in Annex I to this Regulation. This paragraph shall also apply where the processed products resulting from the inward processing procedure are returned goods as referred to in Article 205 of Regulation (EU) No 952/2013.
4.   Where the imported goods listed in Annex I to this Regulation are processed products resulting from an outward processing procedure as referred to in Article 259 of Regulation (EU) No 952/2013, the authorised CBAM declarant shall report in the CBAM declaration only the emissions of the processing operation undertaken outside the customs territory of the Union.
5.   Where the imported goods are returned goods as referred to in Article 203 of Regulation (EU) No 952/2013, the authorised CBAM declarant shall report separately, in the CBAM declaration, ‘zero’ for the total embedded emissions corresponding to those goods.
6.   The Commission is empowered to adopt implementing acts concerning the standard format of the CBAM declaration, including detailed information for each installation and country of origin and type of goods to be reported which supports the totals referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article, in particular as regards embedded emissions and carbon price paid, the procedure for submitting the CBAM declaration via the CBAM registry, and the arrangements for surrendering the CBAM certificates referred to in paragraph 2, point (c), of this Article, in accordance with Article 22(1), in particular as regards the process and the selection by the authorised CBAM declarant of certificates to be surrendered. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 29(2).
