Article 28
Operation of Accreditation and Licensing
1.   Accreditation Bodies appointed by the Member States pursuant to Article 4 of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 shall be responsible for the accreditation of environmental verifiers and the supervision of the activities carried out by environmental verifiers in accordance with this Regulation.
2.   Member States may appoint a Licensing Body, in accordance with Article 5(2) of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008, which shall be responsible for issuing licences to and supervising environmental verifiers.
3.   Member States may decide not to allow the accreditation or licensing of natural persons as environmental verifiers.
4.   Accreditation and Licensing Bodies shall assess an environmental verifier's competence in the light of the elements set out in Articles 20, 21 and 22 relevant to the scope of the requested accreditation or licence.
5.   The scope of accreditation or the licence of environmental verifiers shall be determined according to the classification of economic activities as set out in Regulation (EC) No 1893/2006. That scope shall be limited by the competence of the environmental verifier and, where appropriate, it shall take into account the size and complexity of the activity.
6.   Accreditation and Licensing Bodies shall establish appropriate procedures on accreditation or licensing, refusal of accreditation or a licence, suspension and withdrawal of accreditation or a licence of environmental verifiers and on supervision of environmental verifiers.
Those procedures shall include mechanisms for considering observations from concerned parties, including Competent Bodies and the representative bodies of organisations, concerning applicants and accredited or licensed environmental verifiers.
7.   In the case of a refusal of accreditation or licence, the Accreditation or Licensing Body shall inform the environmental verifier of the reasons for the decision.
8.   Accreditation or Licensing Bodies shall establish, revise and update a list of environmental verifiers and their scope of accreditation or licence in their Member States and shall communicate each month, directly or via the national authorities as decided by the Member State concerned, changes in that list to the Commission and to the Competent Body of the Member State where the Accreditation or Licensing Body is located.
9.   Within the framework of the rules and procedures regarding monitoring of activities as laid down in Article 5(3) of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008, Accreditation and Licensing Bodies shall draw up a supervision report where they decide, after consultation with the environmental verifier concerned, either of the following:
(a)
that the activities of the environmental verifier were not performed adequately enough to ensure that the requirements of this Regulation are met by the organisation;
(b)
that the verification and the validation by the environmental verifier were carried out in violation of one or more of the requirements of this Regulation.
This report shall be transmitted to the Competent Body in the Member State where the organisation is registered or applies for registration and, if applicable, to the Accreditation or Licensing Body that granted the accreditation or licence.
