Article 13
Registration of organisations
1.   Competent Bodies shall consider applications for registration of organisations in accordance with the procedures established to this end.
2.   Where an organisation applies for registration, the Competent Body shall register that organisation and give it a registration number if all the following conditions are fulfilled:
(a)
the Competent Body has received an application for registration, which includes all the documents referred to in Article 5(2)(a) to (d);
(b)
the Competent Body has checked that the verification and validation have been carried out in accordance with Articles 25, 26 and 27;
(c)
the Competent Body is satisfied on the basis of material evidence received, for example through a written report from the competent enforcement authority that there is no evidence of breach of applicable legal requirements relating to the environment;
(d)
there are no relevant complaints from interested parties or complaints have been positively solved;
(e)
the Competent Body is satisfied on the basis of evidence received that the organisation meets all the requirements of this Regulation; and
(f)
the Competent Body has received a registration fee, if applicable.
3.   The Competent Body shall inform the organisation that it has been registered and provide the organisation with its registration number and the EMAS logo.
4.   If a Competent Body concludes that an applicant organisation does not comply with the requirements set out in paragraph 2, it shall refuse to register that organisation and communicate a reasoned justification to the organisation.
5.   If a Competent Body receives a written supervision report from the Accreditation or Licensing Body which provides evidence that the activities of the environmental verifier were not performed adequately enough to ensure that the requirements of this Regulation are met by the applicant organisation, it shall refuse to register that organisation. The Competent Body shall invite the organisation to submit a new application for registration.
6.   In order to obtain the necessary evidence for taking a decision on refusal of registration of organisations, the Competent Body shall consult the concerned parties including the organisation.
