Article 23
Supervision of environmental verifiers
1.   Supervision of verification and validation activities carried out by environmental verifiers in:
(a)
the Member State where they are accredited or licensed shall be carried out by the Accreditation or Licensing Body that granted the accreditation or licence;
(b)
a third country shall be carried out by the Accreditation or Licensing Body that granted the accreditation or licence to the environmental verifier for those activities;
(c)
a Member State other than where the accreditation or licence was granted shall be carried out by the Accreditation or Licensing Body of the Member State where the verification takes place.
2.   At least four weeks in advance of each verification in a Member State, the environmental verifier shall notify its accreditation or licence details and the time and place of the verification to the Accreditation or Licensing Body responsible for the supervision of the environmental verifier concerned.
3.   The environmental verifier shall immediately inform the Accreditation or Licensing Body of any changes which have a bearing on the accreditation or licence or their scope.
4.   Provision shall be made by the Accreditation or Licensing Body, at regular intervals not exceeding 24 months, to ensure that the environmental verifier continues to comply with the accreditation or licence requirements and to monitor the quality of the verification and validation activities undertaken.
5.   Supervision may consist of an office audit, on-the-spot supervision in organisations, questionnaires, a review of environmental statements or updated environmental statements validated by the environmental verifiers and review of the verification report.
Supervision shall be proportionate to the activity undertaken by the environmental verifier.
6.   Organisations must allow the Accreditation or Licensing Bodies to supervise the environmental verifier during the verification and validation process.
7.   Any decision taken by the Accreditation or Licensing Body to terminate or suspend the accreditation or licence or restrict the scope of the accreditation or licence shall be taken only after the environmental verifier has had the possibility of a hearing.
8.   If the supervising Accreditation or Licensing Body is of the opinion that the quality of the work of an environmental verifier does not meet the requirements of this Regulation, a written supervision report shall be transmitted to the environmental verifier concerned and to the Competent Body to which the organisation concerned intends to apply for registration or which registered the organisation concerned.
In the case of any further dispute, the supervision report shall be transmitted to the Forum of Accreditation and Licensing Bodies referred to in Article 30.
