Article 4
Preparation for registration
1.   Organisations wishing to be registered for the first time shall:
(a)
carry out an environmental review of all environmental aspects of the organisation in accordance with the requirements set out in Annex I and in point A.3.1 of Annex II;
(b)
in the light of the results of the environmental review, develop and implement an environmental management system covering all the requirements referred to in Annex II, and, where available, taking into account the best environmental management practice for the relevant sector referred to in Article 46(1)(a);
(c)
carry out an internal audit in accordance with the requirements set out in point A.5.5 of Annex II and Annex III;
(d)
prepare an environmental statement, in accordance with Annex IV. Where sectoral reference documents as referred to in Article 46 are available for the specific sector, the assessment of the organisation's environmental performance shall take into account the relevant document.
2.   Organisations may use the assistance referred to in Article 32 that is available in the Member State where the organisation applies for registration.
3.   Organisations which have a certified environmental management system, recognised in accordance with Article 45(4), shall not be obliged to carry out those parts which have been recognised as equivalent to this Regulation.
4.   Organisations shall provide material or documentary evidence showing that the organisation complies with all applicable legal requirements relating to the environment.
Organisations may request information from the competent enforcement authority or authorities in accordance with Article 32 or the environmental verifier.
Organisations outside the Community shall also make reference to the legal requirements relating to the environment applicable to similar organisations in the Member States where they intend to submit an application.
Where sectoral reference documents as referred to in Article 46 are available for the specific sector, the assessment of the organisation's environmental performance shall be made with reference to the relevant document.
5.   The initial environmental review, the environment management system, the audit procedure and its implementation shall be verified by an accredited or licensed environmental verifier and the environmental statement shall be validated by that verifier.
