Article 7
Product requirements and harmonised standards conferring a presumption of conformity
1.   Where a product family, or one or more product categories within a product family, is covered either by a performance harmonised standard or by an implementing act referred to in Article 6(1), the Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 89 to supplement this Regulation, by establishing product requirements in accordance with Annex III for that product family or product category, or for parts thereof.
2.   Prior to their placing on the market, products covered by this Regulation shall satisfy the applicable product requirements.
3.   The Commission may, in accordance with Article 10(1) of Regulation (EU) No 1025/2012, request one or more European standardisation organisations to draft harmonised standards conferring the presumption of conformity (‘voluntary harmonised standards’) for the product requirements established by delegated acts referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article.
4.   Where a voluntary harmonised standard requested in accordance with paragraph 3 is adopted by a European standardisation organisation and proposed to the Commission for the purpose of publishing its reference in the Official Journal of the European Union, the Commission shall assess the voluntary harmonised standard in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 1025/2012.
5.   Where a voluntary harmonised standard is in conformity with the applicable legal requirements and satisfies the requirements in relation to the product requirements set out in the standardisation request, the Commission shall without delay publish the reference of that standard in the Official Journal of the European Union.
6.   Where the reference of a voluntary harmonised standard cannot be published in the Official Journal of the European Union, the Commission may publish such a reference with restrictions. Where a reference of a voluntary harmonised standard cannot be published in the Official Journal of the European Union and cannot be published as a reference with restrictions, the Commission shall bring the issue to the attention of the committee referred to in Article 22 of Regulation (EU) No 1025/2012 and of the CPR Acquis Expert Group.
7.   A product subject to product requirements which is in conformity with voluntary harmonised standards or parts thereof, the references of which have been published in the Official Journal of the European Union, shall be presumed to be in conformity with the product requirements covered by those standards or parts thereof.
8.   The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 89 to amend Annex III in order to adapt it to technical progress and to cover new risks and environmental aspects and to comply with the priorities established in Article 4, based on the regulatory needs of the Member States.
