Article 10
Assessment and verification systems
1.   The assessment and verification of a product’s performance in relation to its essential characteristics, as set out in harmonised technical specifications adopted in accordance with Articles 5 and 6 or in European assessment documents referred to in Article 31, or of the product’s conformity with product requirements adopted in accordance with Article 7, shall be carried out in accordance with one or more of the systems set out in Annex IX.
2.   The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 89 to supplement this Regulation, by determining, for each product family or product category, the applicable assessment and verification system among those referred to in Annex IX. Those delegated acts may determine different assessment and verification systems within the same product family or product category, differentiating by essential characteristic or product requirement. The assessment and verification systems shall be determined before the harmonised technical specifications or European assessment documents become applicable.
3.   The delegated acts adopted in accordance with paragraph 2 shall take into account the intended uses, the potential damage resulting from product deficiencies, the product’s sensitivity to performance variations under production conditions, the likelihood of errors during its manufacturing and the possibility of easily detecting manufacturing errors. Those delegated acts shall be tailored to the respective product families or product categories and shall minimise the burden on manufacturers, whilst ensuring a high level of protection of health and safety of persons and of the environment.
4.   The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 89 in order to amend Annex IX to:
(a)
introduce additional assessment and verification systems when necessary to adapt to technical progress; or
(b)
amend the existing assessment and verification systems to counter systematic non-compliance by notified bodies or manufacturers and to harmonise the application of the requirements or obligations contained in them, without such amendments adding or removing any task defined in a system.
When adopting delegated acts under point (a), the Commission may not introduce additional systems that set more demanding obligations for economic operators than those provided for in System 1+. In addition, the Commission may introduce such additional systems only when it is evident that guidance on the application of existing systems has proved to be insufficient.
