Article 25
Obligations of distributors
1.   When making products available on the market, distributors shall act with due care in relation to the obligations of this Regulation.
2.   Before making a product available on the market, the distributor shall verify that:
(a)
the product bears the CE marking, and the labelling in accordance with Article 22(9), where required;
(b)
the product is accompanied, where required, by a declaration of performance and conformity, or that the declaration is available in accordance with Article 16(2);
(c)
the product is accompanied by general product information, instructions for use and safety information in accordance with Article 22(6), in a language which can be easily understood by end users in the Member State in which the product is to be made available on the market;
(d)
the manufacturer and the importer have complied with the requirements set out in Article 22(5) and (7) and Article 24(6) respectively.
3.   The distributor shall display to customers, in a visible manner, before they are bound by a sales contract, including in the case of distance selling, the information which must be provided pursuant to this Regulation.
4.   Where a distributor considers or has reason to believe that a product is not in conformity with its declared performance or not in compliance with other applicable requirements in this Regulation, the distributor shall not make the product available on the market until it conforms to its accompanying declaration of performance and conformity and it complies with the other applicable requirements in this Regulation. Furthermore, where the product presents a risk, the distributor shall inform the manufacturer and the responsible competent national authorities thereof.
5.   The distributor shall ensure that, while a product is under its responsibility, storage or transport conditions do not jeopardise the product’s conformity with its declared performance or its compliance with other applicable requirements in this Regulation.
6.   A distributor who considers or has reason to believe that a product, which it has made available on the market, is not in conformity with its declared performance or not in compliance with other applicable requirements in this Regulation shall make sure that the necessary corrective measures to bring that product into conformity or, if appropriate, to withdraw or to recall it, are taken. Furthermore, where the product poses a risk, the distributor shall immediately inform the competent national authorities of the Member States in which it has made the product available on the market to that effect, giving details, in particular, of the non-conformity and of any corrective measures taken.
