Article 6
Other harmonised technical specifications laying down essential characteristics
1.   While priority shall be given to the elaboration of standards, by way of derogation from Article 5(1) to (4) of this Regulation, in order to cover the regulatory needs of Member States and to pursue the goals of Article 114 TFEU, the Commission may adopt implementing acts laying down essential characteristics, their assessment methods and technical details pursuant to Article 5 of this Regulation for one or more product families or for one or more product categories within a family.
Those implementing acts shall be adopted only if the following conditions are fulfilled:
(a)
the Commission has requested, pursuant to Article 5(2), one or more European standardisation organisations to draft a harmonised standard and:
(i)
the request has not been accepted; or
(ii)
the harmonised standard addressing that request is not delivered within the deadline set in accordance with Article 10(1) of Regulation (EU) No 1025/2012 and no later than three years after the acceptance of the standardisation request; or
(iii)
the harmonised standard does not comply with the request; and
(b)
no implementing act, as referred to in Article 5(8), first subparagraph, making mandatory a harmonised standard covering the essential characteristics, their assessment methods and technical details pursuant to Article 5 was adopted in the last 5 years, or such an implementing act was adopted within the last five years, but with restrictions, as referred to in Article 5(8), second subparagraph.
Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 90(3).
2.   Before preparing a draft implementing act referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article, the Commission shall inform the committee referred to in Article 22 of Regulation (EU) No 1025/2012 that it considers that the conditions in paragraph 1 of this Article are fulfilled.
3.   When preparing the draft implementing act, the Commission shall take into account the views of relevant bodies and of the CPR Acquis Expert Group and shall duly consult all relevant stakeholder organisations receiving Union financing under Regulation (EU) No 1025/2012.
4.   Where an implementing act referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article covers the same essential characteristics or assessment methods in relation to a specific product family or product category as a harmonised standard the reference of which has been published in the Official Journal of the European Union or in respect of which an implementing act referred to in Article 5(8) has been adopted, the Commission shall withdraw from the Official Journal of the European Union the reference of that harmonised standard or repeal that implementing act. Where the implementing act referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article only partially covers the harmonised standard, the Commission shall retain the implementing act laying down a harmonised standard that is subject to restrictions.
5.   When a Member State or the European Parliament considers that an implementing act adopted in accordance with paragraph 1 does not entirely satisfy the requirements to be met in relation to the essential characteristics to be covered in view of the basic requirements for construction works, it shall inform the Commission thereof, by submitting a detailed explanation. The Commission shall assess that detailed explanation and may, if appropriate, amend the implementing act in question.
6.   The Commission shall follow the procedure in Article 5 to request any revision or update of the essential characteristics or assessment methods in relation to the same product families or product categories as those covered by the implementing act referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article. Where the harmonised standard delivered by the European standardisation organisation is suitable to be adopted in accordance with Article 5(8), the Commission shall repeal the implementing act adopted in accordance with paragraph 1 of this Article, or the parts thereof which cover the same essential characteristics or assessment methods in relation to the same product families or product categories as those covered by the harmonised standard.
