Article 81
International cooperation
1.   For the purposes of the protection of health and safety of persons or of the environment, the Commission may, cooperate with authorities of third countries or international organisations in the field of application of this Regulation. Such cooperation may include:
(a)
the exchange of information on enforcement activities and measures related to safety and protection of the environment, including market surveillance;
(b)
the exchange of data of economic operators;
(c)
the exchange of information on assessment methods and product testing;
(d)
the exchange of information on product recalls, requests for corrective actions and other similar actions;
(e)
cooperation on scientific, technical, and regulatory matters, aiming to improve product safety or the protection of the environment and consumers;
(f)
the exchange of information on emerging issues of significant environmental, health and safety relevance;
(g)
the exchange of information on standardisation-related activities;
(h)
the exchange of officials.
The exchange of information pursuant to this paragraph shall respect confidentiality rules and comply with applicable Union law.
2.   The information exchange referred to in paragraph 1 may take the form of:
(a)
a non-systematic exchange, in duly justified and specific cases; or
(b)
a systematic exchange, based on an administrative arrangement specifying the type of information to be exchanged and the modalities for the exchange.
The Commission shall regularly inform Member States about the cooperation activities with third countries or international organisations that it undertakes pursuant to the first subparagraph.
3.   The Commission may adopt implementing acts, giving authorities of selected third countries that voluntarily apply this Regulation, or that have regulatory systems for construction products similar to this Regulation, access to or the right to fully participate in one or more of the following:
(a)
the information and communication system established in accordance with Article 71(1);
(b)
the construction digital product passport system set up in accordance with Article 75;
(c)
the training events organised in accordance with Article 73(2).
Access to the systems and events referred to in the first subparagraph shall be granted on condition that the third country concerned commits to act against economic operators that infringe this Regulation from their territory, and to ensure confidentiality.
Full participation in the systems referred to in Articles 71 and 75 may only be granted where agreements between the European Union and third countries so provide. Such participation may be offered to third countries provided that the third country’s legislation is aligned with this Regulation and third country competent national authorities recognise certificates issued by notified bodies or European technical assessments in accordance with this Regulation. Such participation shall be subject to the fulfilment of the same obligations as those which apply to Member States under this Regulation, including notification and follow-up obligations.
The implementing acts referred to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph shall be adopted in accordance with the advisory procedure referred to in Article 90(2).
4.   Any information exchange under this Article, to the extent it involves personal data, shall be carried out in accordance with Union data protection rules. If no adequacy decision pursuant to Article 45 of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 has been adopted by the Commission in respect of the third country or international organisation concerned, the information exchange shall exclude personal data. If an adequacy decision for the third country or international organisation has been adopted, the information exchange with that third country or international organisation may contain personal data falling within the scope of the adequacy decision but only to the extent that such exchange is necessary for the sole purpose of the protection of health and safety of persons or of the environment.

CHAPTER XII


INCENTIVES AND PUBLIC PROCUREMENT

