Article 24
Obligations of importers
1.   Importers shall place on the market only products which are compliant with this Regulation.
2.   Before placing a product on the market, the importer shall ensure that the product’s compliance with applicable requirements and its performance in relation to relevant essential characteristics have been demonstrated by the manufacturer in accordance with Article 22(1) and (2).
The importer shall ensure that:
(a)
the manufacturer has drawn up the technical documentation referred to in Article 22(3);
(b)
the product bears the CE marking, and the labelling in accordance with Article 22(9);
(c)
the product is accompanied by the declaration of performance and conformity or that the declaration is available in accordance with Article 16(1) or (2); and
(d)
the manufacturer has complied with the requirements set out in Article 22(5), (6) and (7).
3.   The importer shall verify that the use of the product has been declared by the manufacturer, and shall ensure that the product is accompanied by general product information, instructions for use and safety information as set out in Annex IV in a language determined by the Member State concerned or, in absence of such determination, in a language which can be easily understood by users. The importer shall display to customers, in a visible manner, before they are bound by a sales contract, including in the case of distance selling, the information which must be provided pursuant to this Regulation or harmonised technical specifications.
4.   The importer shall ensure that, while a product is under its responsibility, the conditions of its storage or transport do not jeopardise its conformity with the declaration of performance and conformity, or its compliance with other applicable requirements in this Regulation.
5.   Where an importer considers, or has reason to believe, that a product is not in conformity with the declaration of performance and conformity, or not in compliance with other applicable requirements in this Regulation, the importer shall not place the product on the market until it conforms to the accompanying declaration of performance and conformity and it complies with the other applicable requirements of this Regulation, or until the declaration of performance and conformity is corrected. Furthermore, where the product presents a risk, the importer shall inform the manufacturer and the responsible competent national authority thereof.
6.   The importer shall indicate its name, registered trade name or registered trade mark, its place of business, its contact address and, where available, electronic means of communication, either on the product or, where that is not possible, on its packaging, or in a document accompanying the product.
7.   The importer shall investigate complaints, and, if necessary, keep a register of complaints, of non-conforming products and of product withdrawals or recalls, and shall keep manufacturers and distributors informed of any such monitoring.
8.   Importers who consider or have reason to believe that a product, which they have placed on the market, is not in conformity with its declared performance or not in compliance with other applicable requirements in this Regulation, shall immediately take the necessary corrective measures to bring that product into conformity, or, if appropriate, to withdraw or recall it. Furthermore, where the product poses a risk, importers shall immediately inform the competent national authorities of the Member States in which they made the product available on the market to that effect, giving details, in particular, of the non-conformity and of any corrective measures taken.
9.   Importers selling to end users shall also fulfil the obligations incumbent on distributors.
