Article 27
Obligations of fulfilment service providers
1.   When contributing to the making available on the market of a product, fulfilment service providers shall act with due care in relation to the obligations of this Regulation.
2.   A fulfilment service provider shall make sure that the labelling and documents provided by the manufacturer or importer are available or accompany the product, and in particular:
(a)
the CE marking and the labelling referred to in Article 22(9);
(b)
the declaration of performance and conformity;
(c)
the general product information and the instructions for use and safety information referred to in Article 22(6).
3.   A fulfilment service provider shall ensure that the conditions during warehousing, packaging, addressing or dispatching do not jeopardise a product’s conformity with its declared performance or its compliance with other applicable requirements in this Regulation. Manufacturers or importers of construction products shall provide their fulfilment service providers with the detailed information necessary for ensuring the safe storage, packaging, addressing or dispatch, and the further functioning of the product.
4.   Fulfilment service providers shall support product withdrawals or recalls, regardless of whether initiated by market surveillance authorities, manufacturers, authorised representatives or importers.
5.   Where a fulfilment service provider considers or has reason to believe that a product is not in conformity with the declaration of performance and conformity or not in compliance with other applicable requirements in this Regulation, it shall not support the making available of the product on the market until the product conforms to the relevant declaration of performance and conformity, and it complies with the other applicable requirements in this Regulation, or until the declaration of performance and conformity is corrected. Furthermore, where the product presents a risk, the fulfilment service provider shall inform the manufacturer and the responsible competent national authority thereof.
