Article 39
Designation, monitoring and evaluation of TABs
1.   Member States may, through their designating authorities, designate TABs within their territories for one or several product families listed in Annex VII. Member States may also designate TABs within their territories as competent for emerging or innovative products that do not fall into already existing product families listed in Annex VII.
Member States shall communicate the name of the TAB, its address and the product family or families it is competent for to the Commission.
2.   The Commission shall assign an identification number to each TAB.
The Commission shall make publicly available the list of TABs designated under this Regulation by electronic means and indicate their identifications numbers, the product families for which they are designated and any limitations in the most precise possible way.
The Commission shall ensure that that list is kept up-to-date.
3.   The designating authority shall monitor the activities and competence of the TABs designated in their respective Member State, and where necessary their subsidiaries and subcontractors, and evaluate them in relation to the respective requirements set out in this Chapter. The designating authority shall impose corrective measures on TABs wherever there is an infringement of this Regulation.
Member States shall inform the Commission of their national procedures for the designation of TABs, of the monitoring of their activity and competence, and of any changes to that information.
4.   TABs shall, without delay, and at the latest within 15 days, inform the designating authority of any changes which may affect their compliance with the requirements set out in this Chapter or their ability to satisfy their obligations under this Regulation.
5.   TABs shall, at the request of the relevant designating authority, supply all relevant information and documents, required to enable that authority, the Commission and the Member States to verify their compliance with the requirements under this Regulation.
6.   Where a TAB no longer complies with the requirements of this Regulation, the designating authority shall restrict, suspend or withdraw the designation of that TAB for the relevant product family as appropriate, depending on the seriousness of the failure to meet those requirements. Where a TAB has repeatedly not complied with corrective measures imposed in accordance with paragraph 3 of this Article, the designating authority may restrict, suspend or withdraw the designation of that TAB. The designating authority shall inform the Commission and the other Member States of any restriction, suspension or withdrawal of a designation. Articles 53(2) and 54 shall apply.
