Article 51
Notification procedure
1.   Notifying authorities may notify only bodies which have satisfied the requirements laid down in Article 46.
2.   Notifying authorities shall notify the Commission and the other Member States using the electronic notification tool developed and managed by the Commission.
Exceptionally, for cases regarding groupings of essential characteristics set out in Annex X, for which the appropriate electronic tool is not available, a notification in other electronic form shall be accepted.
3.   The notification shall include full details of the functions to be performed, reference to the relevant harmonised technical specification or to the relevant European assessment document and, for the purposes of the system set out in Annex IX, the essential characteristics for which the body is competent and the relevant attestation of that competence.
However, reference to the relevant harmonised technical specification or to the relevant European assessment document is not required in the cases regarding groupings of essential characteristics set out in Annex X.
4.   Where a notification is not based on an accreditation certificate as referred to in Article 50(2), the notifying authority shall provide the Commission and the other Member States with all documentary evidence which attests to the body’s competence and the arrangements in place to ensure that that body will be monitored regularly and will continue to satisfy the requirements laid down in Article 46.
5.   The body concerned may perform the activities of a notified body if the Commission or the other Member States do not raise any objections within two weeks of a notification, where an accreditation certificate is used, or within two months of notification, where an accreditation certificate is not used.
Only such a body shall be considered a notified body for the purpose of this Regulation.
6.   Valid notifications shall be included by the Commission in the list of notified bodies referred to in Article 52(2).
7.   The Commission and the other Member States shall be notified of any subsequent relevant changes to the notification.
