Article 8
Common specifications conferring a presumption of conformity
1.   The Commission may adopt implementing acts establishing common specifications that provide an alternative means to comply with the product requirements established in accordance with Article 7(1).
Those implementing acts shall be adopted only where the following conditions are fulfilled:
(a)
the Commission has requested, pursuant to Article 7(3), one or more European standardisation organisations to draft a voluntary harmonised standard for the product requirements and:
(i)
the request has not been accepted; or
(ii)
the voluntary harmonised standard addressing that request is not delivered within the deadline set in accordance with Article 10(1) of Regulation (EU) No 1025/2012; or
(iii)
the voluntary harmonised standard does not comply with the request; and
(b)
no reference of voluntary harmonised standards covering the product requirements has been published in the Official Journal of the European Union in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 1025/2012 and no such reference is expected to be published within a reasonable period.
Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 90(3).
2.   Before preparing a draft implementing act referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article, the Commission shall inform the committee referred to in Article 22 of Regulation (EU) No 1025/2012 that it considers that the conditions in paragraph 1 of this Article have been fulfilled.
3.   When preparing the draft implementing act referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article, the Commission shall take into account the views of the relevant bodies and of the CPR Acquis Expert Group and shall duly consult all relevant stakeholder organisations receiving Union financing under Regulation (EU) No 1025/2012.
4.   A product which is in conformity with the common specifications established by implementing acts referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article, or parts thereof, shall be presumed to be in conformity with the product requirements established by delegated acts referred to in Article 7(1) covered by those common specifications or parts thereof.
5.   The Commission shall repeal the implementing acts referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article, or parts thereof which cover the same product requirements as those covered by a voluntary harmonised standard the reference of which is published in the Official Journal of the European Union in accordance with Article 7(5) or (6).
6.   When a Member State or the European Parliament considers that a common specification does not entirely satisfy the product requirements established by delegated acts referred to in Article 7(1), it shall inform the Commission thereof, by submitting a detailed explanation. The Commission shall assess that detailed explanation and may, if appropriate, amend the implementing act establishing the common specification in question.
