Article 72
Product contact points for construction
1.   Member States shall support economic operators by product contact points for construction. Member States shall designate and maintain at least one product contact point for construction on their territory and shall ensure that their product contact points for construction have sufficient powers and adequate resources for the proper performance of their tasks. They shall ensure that product contact points for construction deliver their services in accordance with Regulation (EU) 2018/1724 and that they coordinate with the product contact points for mutual recognition established pursuant to Article 9(1) of Regulation (EU) 2019/515 of the European Parliament and of the Council (29).
2.   Product contact points for construction shall provide, at the request of an economic operator or a competent national authority of another Member State, any useful product related information, such as:
(a)
electronic copies of, or online access to, the national technical rules and national administrative procedures applicable to products in the territory in which the product contact points for construction is established;
(b)
information on whether those products are subject to prior authorisation under national law;
(c)
rules applicable to the incorporation, assembling or installation of products.
Product contact points for construction shall also provide information on product related provisions of this Regulation and of acts adopted in accordance with it.
3.   Product contact points for construction shall provide information free of charge within 15 working days of receiving any request under paragraph 2.
4.   Product contact points for construction shall be able to carry out their functions in a manner that avoids conflicts of interest, particularly in respect of the procedures for obtaining the CE marking.
5.   Paragraphs 1 to 4 apply also to products which have not yet been covered by harmonised technical specifications.
6.   The Commission shall publish and keep up-to-date a list of the national product contact points for construction.
