Article 41
Coordination of TABs
1.   The TABs shall establish an organisation for technical assessment (‘organisation of TABs’) under this Regulation.
2.   The organisation of TABs shall at least carry out the following tasks:
(a)
supply the Commission with relevant technical content relating to European assessment documents when the development of harmonised technical specifications based on the same product families is due to take place in accordance with the working plan referred to in Article 4(2). That information shall be based on close collaboration with the relevant European standardisation organisations;
(b)
organise the coordination of the TABs and, if necessary, ensure cooperation and consultation with other stakeholders;
(c)
ensure that examples of best practice are shared between TABs to promote greater efficiency and provide a better service to industry;
(d)
develop and adopt European assessment documents;
(e)
coordinate the application of the procedures set out in Article 59(2), Article 60(2) and in Article 61(2), as well as provide the support needed to that end;
(f)
inform the Commission of any question related to the preparation of European assessment documents and of any aspects related to the interpretation of the procedures set out in Article 60(2) and in Article 61(2) and suggest improvements to the Commission based on experience gained;
(g)
communicate any observations concerning a TAB not satisfying its tasks in accordance with the procedures set out in Article 60(2) and in Article 61(2) to the Commission and the Member State which designated the TAB;
(h)
report annually to the Commission on:
(i)
the fulfilment of the tasks referred to above;
(ii)
the allocation of European assessment document development tasks to the TABs;
(iii)
the even geographic distribution of tasks between TABs;
(iv)
the European technical assessments issued for each European assessment document including the geographical distribution of TABs involved and of the manufacturers receiving the documents; and
(v)
the performance and the independence of TABs; and;
(i)
ensure that adopted European assessment documents and references to European technical assessments are kept publicly available.
The organisation of TABs shall set up a secretariat in order to carry out these tasks.
3.   Member States shall ensure that the TABs contribute adequately with financial and human resources to the organisation of TABs. Organisation of TABs shall establish the contribution of each TAB which shall be proportionate taking into account the annual budget or turnover of each TAB related to its activities as TAB.
4.   The weight in the decision-making process of the organisation of TABs shall not depend on the TABs’ financial contribution, the number of European assessment documents developed or the number of European technical assessments issued by them.
5.   The Commission shall be invited to participate in all meetings of the organisation of TABs.
6.   Union financing may be granted to the organisation of TABs for the implementation of the tasks referred to in paragraph 2. The Commission may make the financing of the organisation of TABs, whether by way of grants or public tenders, subject to the fulfilment of certain organisational and performance requirements set out in those tasks.
