Article 56
Information obligations of notified bodies
1.   Notified bodies shall inform the notifying authority of the following:
(a)
any refusal, restriction, suspension or withdrawal of certificates, validation reports or test reports;
(b)
any circumstances affecting the scope of, and conditions for, notification;
(c)
any request for information on assessment or verification activities carried out which they have received from competent national authorities; and
(d)
on request, third-party tasks in accordance with the assessment and verification systems carried out within the scope of their notification and any other activity performed, including cross-border activities and subcontracting.
2.   Notified bodies shall provide the other bodies notified under this Regulation which carry out similar third-party tasks in accordance with the assessment and verification systems and for products covered by the same harmonised technical specification or the same European assessment document with relevant information on issues relating to negative results from these assessments and verifications, in particular, any refusal, restriction, suspension, or withdrawal of certificates, validation reports or of test reports, and, upon request, positive results from those assessments.
A notified body shall, upon request from another notified body, a competent national authority or the Commission inform the requesting party whether certificates, validation reports or test reports issued by it are valid, restricted, suspended or withdrawn.
3.   Where the Commission or a competent national authority of a Member State submits a request to a notified body established on the territory of another Member State relating to an assessment carried out by that notified body, it shall send a copy of that request to the notifying authority of that other Member State. The notified body concerned shall respond without delay and within 15 days at the latest to the request. The notifying authority shall ensure that such requests are resolved by the notified body unless there is a legitimate reason for not doing so.
4.   Where notified bodies have or receive evidence that:
(a)
another notified body does not comply with the requirements laid down in Article 46 or its obligations;
(b)
a product placed on the market does not comply with this Regulation;
(c)
a product placed on the market, due to its physical condition, is likely to cause a serious risk,
they shall alert and share such evidence with the relevant market surveillance authority or notifying authority, as appropriate.
