Article 20
Obligations of all economic operators
1.   The obligations of economic operators under this Chapter are applicable only in relation to products covered by a harmonised technical specification, or to products that have been CE-marked on the basis of a European technical assessment.
2.   An economic operator shall take all necessary measures to ensure continued compliance with this Regulation. Where non-compliance of the economic operator or of a product has been stated and corrective action has been requested by a market surveillance authority in accordance with Article 65(1), the economic operator shall submit progress reports to that authority until that authority decides that the corrective action can be closed.
3.   An economic operator shall, on request of a competent national authority, identify to that authority any economic operator or other actor:
(a)
who has supplied that economic operator with a product, including components or spare parts of products, and the quantity of that supply, or who has supplied it with a service covered by this Regulation;
(b)
to whom that economic operator has supplied a product, including components or spare parts of products, and the quantity of that supply, or to whom it has supplied a service covered by this Regulation.
When identifying the economic operators or other actors referred to in the first subparagraph, an economic operator shall inform the competent national authority of, at least, the following:
(a)
the contact details, including addresses and email addresses of those economic operators or actors;
(b)
the tax and company registration numbers of those economic operators or actors.
4.   An economic operator shall keep all documents and all information referred to in this Chapter at the disposal of competent national authorities for a period of 10 years after the economic operator supplied or was supplied with the product or service in question, unless the documents or the information have been made available through the digital product passport referred to in Article 76. An economic operator shall present the documentation and information within 10 days of receipt of a request by a competent national authority.
5.   An economic operator may register itself in its respective national system established in accordance with Article 71(5).
An economic operator shall make available to consumers and users communication channels, including telephone numbers, email addresses or dedicated sections of its website, allowing them to communicate any accident, other incident or safety issue they have experienced with the product.
6.   Where an economic operator considers that a non-conforming product presents a risk to health and safety of persons or to the environment, it shall immediately inform thereof the competent national authorities of the Member States in which it made the product available, giving details, in particular, of the non-compliance and of any corrective measures taken. An economic operator may inform the competent national authorities of any other likely infringement of this Regulation of which it becomes aware, of the non-compliance and of any corrective measures taken.
7.   An economic operator shall be liable for infringements of this Article or of the Articles in this Chapter related to its activities, in accordance with national law on contractual and extra-contractual liability.
