Article 23
Obligations of authorised representatives
1.   A manufacturer established in the Union may appoint, by a written mandate, any natural or legal person established within the Union as a single authorised representative. A manufacturer not established in the Union shall appoint a single authorised representative.
The drawing up of technical documentation shall not form part of the authorised representative’s mandate.
2.   The authorised representative shall perform the tasks specified in the mandate received from the manufacturer. The mandate shall allow the authorised representative to do at least the following:
(a)
keep the declaration of performance and conformity and the technical documentation at the disposal of competent national authorities;
(b)
further to a reasoned request from a competent national authority, provide that authority with all the information and documentation necessary to demonstrate the conformity of a product with its declared performance and its compliance with other applicable requirements in this Regulation;
(c)
terminate the contract if the manufacturer has acted contrary to its obligations under this Regulation and inform the manufacturer, the competent national authorities of the Member States where the product is placed on the market and the competent national authority of his own place of business thereof;
(d)
when there is reason to believe that a product is non-compliant or presents a risk, inform the manufacturer and the competent national authorities of the Member States where the product is placed on the market and the competent national authority of the authorised representative thereof; and
(e)
cooperate with the competent national authorities, at their request, in any action taken to eliminate risks posed by, and to remedy non-conformities of, products covered by the mandate of the authorised representative.
3.   The authorised representative shall verify at documentary level that:
(a)
the product bears the CE marking, and the labelling in accordance with Article 22(9);
(b)
the product is accompanied by a declaration of performance and conformity, or that declaration is available in accordance with Article 16(1) or (2); and
(c)
the manufacturer has complied with the requirements set out in Article 22(5), (6) and (7).
4.   Where an authorised representative identifies a case of non-compliance mentioned in paragraph 3 of this Article, it shall ask the manufacturer to act in accordance with Article 22(11) and (12).
