Article 37
European technical assessment
1.   A European technical assessment shall be issued by a TAB, at the request of a manufacturer on the basis of a European assessment document the reference of which has been published in the Official Journal of the European Union in accordance with Article 34.
Provided that there is a European assessment document the reference of which has been published in the Official Journal of the European Union in accordance with Article 34, a European technical assessment may be issued even in the case where a standardisation request has been issued. Such issuing shall be possible until the European assessment document is no longer used pursuant to Article 31(6).
2.   When a request for a European technical assessment is made, the procedure laid down in Annex VI shall apply.
3.   The European technical assessment shall include the performance to be declared, by levels or classes, or in a description, of those essential characteristics that are agreed by the manufacturer and the TAB receiving the request for the European technical assessment for the declared use, and the technical details necessary for the implementation of the assessment and verification system.
The European technical assessment shall also include the assessment of the performance for the predetermined environmental essential characteristics listed in Article 15(3).
4.   The Commission may adopt implementing acts to establish the format of the European technical assessment.
Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 90(3).
5.   European technical assessments issued on the basis of a European assessment document remain valid for either five years after the end of the period set out in Article 34(2) or five years after the reference of the European assessment document is withdrawn from the Official Journal of the European Union.
When the relevant European assessment document for a product is no longer used pursuant to Article 31(6), that product may no longer be placed on the market on the basis of a European technical assessment.
6.   Products covered by a European assessment document for which a European technical assessment has been issued may be CE marked and thereby obtain the same status as products CE marked on the basis of harmonised technical specifications, where the manufacturer satisfies the obligations set out in this Regulation. Where these obligations refer to harmonised technical specifications, the manufacturer shall refer to the European assessment document instead or, where the harmonised technical specifications are also relevant, in addition.
