Article 71
Information systems for harmonised decision-making
1.   The Commission shall establish and maintain an information and communication system for the collection, processing and storage of information, in a structured form, on issues relating to the interpretation or application of the rules laid down in or pursuant to this Regulation, with the aim of ensuring the harmonised application of those rules.
In addition to the Commission and Member States, market surveillance authorities, the single liaison offices appointed under Article 10(3) of Regulation (EU) 2019/1020, the authorities designated under Article 25(1) of Regulation (EU) 2019/1020, notifying authorities, representatives of the group of notified bodies and of the organisation of TABs, and product contact points for construction shall be able to access the information and communication system.
2.   The bodies listed in paragraph 1 may use the information and communication system to raise any question or issue related to the interpretation or application of the rules laid down in or pursuant to this Regulation, including their relationship to other provisions of Union law.
3.   For the purposes of paragraph 2, the bodies listed in paragraph 1 may raise questions or issues related to the following topics:
(a)
the application or interpretation by any other body of the rules laid down in, or pursuant to, this Regulation in a way that diverges from their own practice;
(b)
questions or issues raised through the information and communication system related to the situation they are confronted with or to their own practice;
(c)
situations not foreseen by the rules laid down in or pursuant to this Regulation when first published or referred to in the Official Journal of the European Union, especially but not limited to situations brought about by the emergence of new products or business models;
(d)
whether the rules laid down in or pursuant to this Regulation apply to a situation to which other provisions of Union law also apply and the resulting question of which rules are to prevail.
4.   When raising a question or issue, the relevant body shall enter into the information and communication system information concerning:
(a)
any decision taken in relation to the question or issue raised;
(b)
the rationale behind the approach taken;
(c)
any alternative approach it has identified and its rationale.
5.   Member States shall establish a national information system or email distribution service to inform their competent national authorities, the economic operators active on their territory, TABs and notified bodies with place of business on their territory and, on request, also other TABs and notified bodies, on all matters relevant for the correct interpretation or application of the rules laid down in or pursuant to this Regulation. In doing so, they shall take into account the information available in the information and communications system referred to in paragraph 1.
6.   Competent national authorities, TABs and notified bodies with a place of business in the respective Member State shall register themselves in the system or for the email distribution service and take account of all information transmitted via them. Economic operators may register themselves in the system or for the email distribution service. Member States shall take appropriate measures to bring the system or email distribution service to the attention of economic operators.
7.   The national information system or email distribution service shall be able to receive complaints from any natural or legal person, including TABs and notified bodies, on the uneven application of the rules laid down in or pursuant to this Regulation. If deemed appropriate, the single liaison point shall forward such complaints to their peers in other Member States and to the Commission.
