Article 55
Operational obligations of notified bodies
1.   Notified bodies shall, in accordance with Annex IX carry out the following assessments and verifications:
(a)
assess the performance and the conformity of products;
(b)
verify the conformity of products;
(c)
verify the constancy of performance of products;
(d)
validate the environmental sustainability calculations undertaken by the manufacturer;
(e)
verify the compliance of the manufacturer with the obligations of this Regulation.
Those tasks are hereinafter referred to as ‘assessments and verifications’.
2.   Assessments and verifications shall be carried out with transparency as regards the manufacturer, and in a proportionate manner, avoiding an unnecessary burden for economic operators. The notified bodies shall perform their activities taking due account of the size of the undertaking, the sector in which the undertaking operates, its structure, the degree of complexity of the product technology in question and the mass or serial nature of the production process.
In so doing, the notified bodies shall nevertheless respect the degree of rigour required for the product by this Regulation and the part played by the product for the fulfilment of all basic requirements for construction works.
3.   Where, in the course of the initial inspection of the manufacturing plant and of factory production control, a notified body finds that the manufacturer has not ensured the constancy of performance and conformity of the manufactured product, it shall require the manufacturer to take appropriate corrective measures and shall not issue a certificate or a validation report.
4.   Where, in the course of the monitoring activity aiming at the verification of conformity and of the constancy of performance of the manufactured product, a notified body finds that a product no longer has the same performance to that of the product-type, it shall require the manufacturer to take appropriate corrective measures and shall suspend or withdraw the certificate or the validation report if necessary.
5.   Where corrective measures are not taken or do not have the required effect, the notified body shall restrict, suspend or withdraw any certificates or validation reports, as appropriate.
6.   When taking assessment decisions, including when deciding on the need to suspend or withdraw a certificate or validation report in light of possible instances of non-compliance, notified bodies shall apply clear and pre-determined criteria.
7.   When requested by a manufacturer or provider to do so, notified bodies shall cooperate and share all relevant information with notified bodies that have recognised its assessments and verifications in accordance with Article 62. Notified bodies shall establish an agreement for that purpose.
