Article 65
Procedure to deal with non-compliance
1.   Where a market surveillance authority of one Member State has sufficient reason to believe that certain products covered by a harmonised technical specification or for which a European technical assessment has been issued, or their manufacturer, are non-compliant, it shall carry out an evaluation in relation to those products and the manufacturer concerned covering the respective requirements laid down by this Regulation. The relevant economic operators shall, as necessary, cooperate with the market surveillance authorities.
Where, in the course of that evaluation, the market surveillance authority finds that the products or their manufacturer do not comply with the requirements and obligations laid down in this Regulation, it shall without delay require the relevant economic operator to take appropriate and proportionate corrective actions, as provided for in Article 16(3) of Regulation (EU) 2019/1020, to bring the non-compliance to an end or, if that is not possible, to withdraw the products from the market, or to recall them, all within a reasonable period which is commensurate with the nature of the non-compliance.
The market surveillance authority shall inform the notified bodies accordingly, if notified bodies are involved.
2.   Where the market surveillance authority considers that the non-compliance is not limited to its national territory, it shall, via the single liaison point, inform the Commission and the other Member States of the results of the evaluation and of the actions which it has required the economic operator to take.
3.   The economic operator shall ensure that all appropriate corrective action is taken in respect of all the products concerned that it has made available on the market throughout the Union.
4.   Where the relevant economic operator, within the period referred to in the second subparagraph of paragraph 1, does not take the corrective action referred to in paragraph 1, second subparagraph, or where the non-compliance persists, the market surveillance authority shall ensure that the product concerned is withdrawn or recalled, or that making it available on the market is prohibited or restricted.
The market surveillance authority shall inform the public, and via the single liaison point the Commission and the other Member States, without delay, of those measures.
5.   The information referred to in the second subparagraph of paragraph 4 shall include all available details, in particular the data necessary for the identification of the non-compliant products, the origin of those products, the nature of the non-compliance alleged and the risk involved, the nature and duration of national measures taken as well as the arguments put forward by the relevant economic operator. In particular, the market surveillance authorities shall indicate whether the non-compliance is due to any of the following:
(a)
failure of the products to achieve the declared performance;
(b)
failure of the products to meet product requirements established by delegated acts referred to in Article 7(1);
(c)
failure of the manufacturer to meet obligations;
(d)
shortcomings in the harmonised technical specifications, in a European assessment document, in the voluntary harmonised standards for product requirements the references of which have been published in the Official Journal of the European Union in accordance with Article 7(5) or (6) or in the common specifications established by implementing acts referred to in Article 8(1).
6.   Member States other than the Member State initiating the procedure shall without delay inform the Commission and the other Member States of any measures adopted and of any additional information at their disposal relating to the non-compliance of the products concerned, and, in the event of disagreement with the notified national measure, of their objections.
7.   Where, within two months of receipt of the information referred to in paragraph 4, no objection has been raised by either a Member State or the Commission in respect of a provisional measure taken by a Member State in relation to the product concerned, that measure shall be deemed justified.
8.   Member States shall ensure that appropriate restrictive measures are taken without delay in respect of the product or manufacturer concerned, such as withdrawal of the products from their market.
