Whereas:
(1)
Culture, arts, cultural heritage and cultural diversity are of great value to European society from a cultural, educational, democratic, environmental, social, human rights and economic point of view and should be promoted and supported. The Rome Declaration of 25 March 2017 and the European Council of 14 and 15 December 2017 stated that education and culture are key to building inclusive and cohesive societies for all and to sustaining European competitiveness.
(2)
Pursuant to Article 2 of the Treaty on European Union (TEU), the Union is founded on the values of respect for human dignity, freedom, democracy, equality, the rule of law and the respect for human rights, including the rights of persons belonging to a minority. Those values are common to the Member States in a society in which pluralism, non-discrimination, tolerance, justice, solidarity and equality between women and men prevail. Those values are further reaffirmed and articulated in the rights, freedoms and principles enshrined in the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union (the ‘Charter’), which has the same legal value as the Treaties under Article 6 TEU. In particular, the freedom of expression and information and the freedom of the arts and science are enshrined, respectively, in Articles 11 and 13 of the Charter.
(3)
Article 3 TEU further specifies that the Union’s aim is to promote peace, its values and the well-being of its peoples and that, inter alia, it is to respect its rich cultural and linguistic diversity and ensure that Europe’s cultural heritage is safeguarded and enhanced.
(4)
The communication of the Commission of 22 May 2018 entitled ‘A New European Agenda for Culture’ sets out objectives for the cultural and creative sectors. It aims to harness the power of culture and cultural diversity for social cohesion and societal well-being by fostering the cross-border dimension of cultural and creative sectors and fostering their capacity to grow, to encourage culture-based creativity in education and innovation, and for jobs and growth, and to strengthen international cultural relations. The Creative Europe Programme (the ‘Programme’), together with other Union programmes and funds, will support the New European Agenda for Culture. The intrinsic value of culture and of artistic expression should be preserved and promoted, and artistic creation should be at the heart of the Programme. That is also consistent with the 2005 Unesco Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions, which entered into force on 18 March 2007 and to which the Union and its Member States are parties.
(5)
In order to foster the shared area of cultural diversity for the peoples of Europe, it is important to promote the transnational circulation of artistic and cultural works, collections and products, thereby encouraging dialogue and cultural exchanges, and the transnational mobility of artists and of cultural and creative professionals.
(6)
Safeguarding and enhancing cultural heritage facilitates free participation in cultural life, in line with the United Nations (UN) Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. Therefore, cultural heritage plays an important role in the construction of a peaceful and democratic society, in processes of sustainable development and in the promotion of cultural diversity.
(7)
The promotion of European cultural diversity is based on the freedom of artistic expression, the capabilities and competences of artists and cultural operators, the existence of flourishing and resilient cultural and creative sectors and the ability of artists and cultural operators to create, innovate and produce their works and distribute them to a larger and more diverse European audience. This thereby enlarges the business potential of the cultural and creative sectors, increases access to and the promotion of creative content, artistic research and creativity, and contributes to sustainable growth and job creation. In addition, the promotion of creativity and new knowledge contributes to boosting competitiveness and sparking innovation in industrial value chains. The Union’s rich cultural and linguistic diversity is a key asset for the European project. At the same time, the European cultural and creative market is characterised by geographical specificities, linguistic specificities, or both, which can cause market fragmentation. Continuing efforts are therefore required to ensure that the cultural and creative sectors fully benefit from the Union’s single market and, in particular, from the Digital Single Market.
(8)
The digital shift represents a paradigm change for cultural and creative sectors. It has reshaped habits, relations, and production and consumption models. This presents a number of challenges. At the same time, the digital shift offers new opportunities for cultural and creative sectors in terms of the creation of, distribution of and access to European works, which benefits European society as a whole. The Programme should encourage cultural and creative sectors to take advantage of those opportunities.
(9)
The Programme should take into account the dual nature of the cultural and creative sectors, recognising, on the one hand, the intrinsic and artistic value of culture and, on the other, the economic value of those sectors, including the broader contribution of those sectors to growth, competitiveness, creativity and innovation. The Programme should also take into account the positive impact of culture on intercultural dialogue, social cohesion and the dissemination of knowledge. This requires strong European cultural and creative sectors, in particular a vibrant European audiovisual industry, given its capacity to reach diverse audiences and its economic importance, including its economic importance for other creative sectors. However, competition in global audiovisual markets has been further intensified by the deepening digital shift, for example changes in media production and consumption and the growing position of global platforms in the distribution of content. Therefore, there is a need to step up support for the European industry.
(10)
As exemplified by the Union action for the European Capitals of Culture, established by Decision No 445/2014/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council (4) (the ‘European Capitals of Culture’), the cultural and creative sectors have an important role in enhancing and revitalising the Union’s territories. In that way, the cultural and creative sectors are key drivers for boosting quality-based tourism and regional, local and urban development across the Union.
(11)
In order to be effective, the Programme should take into account the specific nature and challenges of the different cultural and creative sectors, their different target groups and their particular needs through tailor-made approaches within a strand dedicated to the audiovisual sector (the ‘Media strand’), a strand dedicated to the other cultural and creative sectors (the ‘Culture strand’) and a cross-sectoral strand (the ‘Cross-sectoral strand’).
(12)
The Programme should support actions and activities with European added value, which complement regional, national, international and other Union programmes and policies and positively impact European citizens, and should support the development and promotion of transnational cooperation and exchanges within the cultural and creative sectors. Through such actions and activities, the Programme contributes to the strengthening of European identity and values while promoting cultural and linguistic diversity.
(13)
Music, in all its forms and expressions, and in particular contemporary and live music, is an important component of the cultural, artistic and economic landscape of the Union and its heritage. It is an element of social cohesion and it serves as a key instrument to enhance economic and cultural development. The Culture strand should therefore pay attention to the music sector.
(14)
The Culture strand should promote the networking of creative communities and foster cross-border and multi-disciplinary collaboration with the use of different skillsets, such as artistic, creative, digital and technological skillsets.
(15)
The Cross-sectoral strand aims to exploit the potential of collaboration among different cultural and creative sectors and to address the common challenges they face. There are benefits in terms of knowledge transfer and administrative efficiencies to be gained from a joint transversal approach. In that context, the Programme desks contribute to the achievement of the objectives of the Programme and its implementation.
(16)
Union intervention is needed in the audiovisual sector to accompany the Union’s Digital Single Market policies. That concerns, in particular, the modernisation of the copyright framework by means of Directives (EU) 2019/789 (5) and (EU) 2019/790 (6) of the European Parliament and of the Council, and Directive 2010/13/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council (7), as amended by Directive (EU) 2018/1808 of the European Parliament and of the Council (8). Directives (EU) 2019/789 and (EU) 2019/790 seek to strengthen the capacity of European audiovisual operators to create, finance, produce and disseminate works that are prominently displayed on different media, for example TV, cinema or Video On Demand, that are available and attractive to audiences in a more open and competitive market within Europe and beyond. Those Directives also aim to achieve a well-functioning market place for creators and right holders, especially for press publications and online platforms, and to ensure fair remuneration of authors and performers, which are dimensions that should be taken into account across the Programme. Furthermore, support should be scaled up in order to address recent market developments, in particular the stronger position of global platforms of distribution in comparison to national broadcasters that traditionally invest in the production of European works. As the market conditions and audiovisual operators continue to evolve, specific criteria to define what constitutes an independent production company should be provided in the context of the implementation of the Programme.
(17)
The Programme should allow for the broadest possible participation of organisations in the cultural and creative sectors in it and for those organisations to access the Programme in the broadest way possible, regardless of their geographical origin. The Programme should support those organisations and the best talent, wherever located, to operate across borders and internationally. The Media strand should take into account the differences across countries regarding the production and distribution of audiovisual content and access to audiovisual content and trends relating to the consumption of audiovisual content, and, in particular, their linguistic and geographical specificities, thereby providing a more level playing field, broadening the participation of, and increasing collaboration among, Member States with different audiovisual capacities and supporting European talent, wherever located, to operate across borders and internationally. The specificities of the outermost regions referred to in Article 349 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU) should also be taken into account.
(18)
The special actions under the Programme such as the Union action for the European Heritage Label established by Decision No 1194/2011/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council (9) (the ‘European Heritage Label’), the European Heritage Days, European prizes in the areas of contemporary, rock and pop music, literature, heritage and architecture and the European Capitals of Culture have directly reached millions of European citizens, have demonstrated the social and economic benefits of European cultural policies, and should therefore be continued and whenever possible expanded. The Culture strand should support the networking activities of the European Heritage Label sites. Consideration should also be paid to the possibility of extending the European prizes to new fields and sectors, notably theatre.
(19)
Culture is key to strengthening inclusive and cohesive communities. In the context of migration issues and integration challenges, culture plays a fundamental role in providing opportunities for intercultural dialogue and in integrating migrants and refugees, helping them to feel part of host societies, and in developing good relations between migrants and new communities.
(20)
In order to contribute to an inclusive society, the Programme should promote and increase cultural participation across the Union, in particular with regard to people with disabilities and people from disadvantaged backgrounds.
(21)
In accordance with the Davos Declaration of 22 January 2018 entitled ‘Towards a high-quality Baukultur for Europe’, steps should be taken to promote a new integrated approach to the shaping of a high-quality built environment which is anchored in culture, which strengthens social cohesion, which guarantees a sustainable environment and which contributes to the health and well-being of the population as a whole. That approach should not only place an emphasis on urban areas, but also on the interconnectivity of peripheral and rural areas. The concept of Baukultur encompasses all factors which have a direct impact on the quality of life of citizens and communities, thereby fostering inclusivity, cohesion and sustainability in a very concrete way.
(22)
Freedom of expression and artistic freedom are at the core of vibrant cultural and creative sectors. In particular, the news media sector needs a free, diverse and pluralistic media environment. In conjunction with Directive 2010/13/EU, the Programme should therefore promote a free, diverse and pluralistic media environment, encouraging crossovers and cross-cutting activities supporting the news media sector. The Programme should provide support for new media professionals and enhance the development of critical thinking among citizens by means of promoting media literacy.
(23)
The Programme should also stimulate interest in and improve access to European audiovisual works, in particular through audience development measures, including film literacy.
(24)
The mobility of artists and cultural workers beyond borders under the Culture strand can contribute to better linked, stronger and more sustainable cultural and creative sectors in the Union because this is a way to accelerate the development of skills and the learning curve within the cultural and creative sectors, to improve intercultural awareness and to foster the transnational co-creation, co-production, circulation and dissemination of works.
(25)
Cooperation projects, in particular small-scale projects, given the specificities of the cultural and creative sectors, should be at the core of the Culture strand. Therefore, the Commission should facilitate participation in the Programme by achieving substantial simplification of bureaucratic procedures, mostly in the application stage, and, for small-scale projects, by allowing higher co-financing rates.
(26)
In line with Articles 8 and 10 TFEU, the Programme, in all its activities, should support gender mainstreaming and the mainstreaming of non-discrimination objectives and should, where applicable, define appropriate gender-balance criteria. Women are actively engaged in cultural and creative sectors as authors, professionals, teachers, artists and audience members. However, it is less likely that women occupy decision-making positions in cultural, artistic and creative institutions. Therefore, the Programme should promote female talent in order to support women’s artistic and professional careers.
(27)
Taking into account the joint communication of 8 June 2016 entitled ‘Towards an EU strategy for international cultural relations’, endorsed by the resolution of the European Parliament of 5 July 2017 on the mandate for the trilogue on the 2018 draft budget (10), and the Council conclusions of 24 May 2017 on an EU strategic approach to international cultural relations, European funding instruments and, in particular, the Programme should recognise the relevance of culture in international relations and its role in promoting European values by dedicated and targeted actions designed to have a clear Union impact on the global scene.
(28)
In line with the communication of the Commission of 22 July 2014 entitled ‘Towards an integrated approach to cultural heritage for Europe’, relevant policies and instruments should ensure the legacy of the 2018 European Year of Cultural Heritage, which successfully and efficiently mainstreamed culture into other policy fields, in particular through a participatory governance approach, in drawing out the long term and sustainability value of Europe’s cultural heritage, developing a more integrated approach to its preservation and valorisation and supporting the sustainable safeguarding, the regeneration, the adaptive reuse and the promotion of its values through awareness-raising and networking activities. In the culture sector, consideration should be given to supporting artists, creators and artistic craftspeople skilled in the traditional trades related to cultural heritage restoration. In the audiovisual sector, in particular, heritage works are a crucial source of memory and cultural diversity and represent potential market opportunities. In this context, audiovisual archives and libraries contribute to the preservation and re-use of, and new market developments for, heritage works.
(29)
In line with the communication of the Commission of 10 March 2020 entitled ‘A New Industrial Strategy for Europe’, the Union should rely on its strengths, in particular its diversity, its talents, its values, its way of life and its innovators and creators.
(30)
The success of the Programme relies on the development of innovative and effective projects that generate good practices in terms of transnational European cooperation in the cultural and creative sectors. Wherever possible, such success stories should be promoted, encouraging the support of new business models and skills, fostering traditional know-how and translating creative and interdisciplinary solutions into economic and social value.
(31)
The Programme should be open, subject to certain conditions, to the participation of Members of the European Free Trade Association, acceding countries, candidate countries and potential candidates benefiting from a pre-accession strategy, European Neighbourhood Policy countries and the Union’s strategic partners.
(32)
Third countries which are members of the European Economic Area may participate in Union programmes in the framework of the cooperation established under the Agreement on the European Economic Area (11), which provides for the implementation of the programmes on the basis of a decision adopted under that Agreement. Third countries may also participate on the basis of other legal instruments. A specific provision should be introduced in this Regulation requiring third countries to grant the necessary rights and access required for the authorising officer responsible, the European Anti-Fraud Office (OLAF) and the Court of Auditors to comprehensively exercise their respective competences.
(33)
Third countries should aim to participate fully in the Programme. However, third countries that do not fulfil the conditions for participating in the Media and Cross-sectoral strands but participate in the Culture strand should be able to set up and support Programme desks to promote the Programme in their country and to stimulate cross-border cooperation within the cultural and creative sectors.
(34)
Derogations from the obligation to fulfil the conditions set out in Directive 2010/13/EU should be subject to scrutiny and granted to European Neighbourhood Policy countries in duly justified cases, taking into account the specific situation of the audiovisual market in the country concerned and the level of integration in the European audiovisual policy framework. Progress towards the achievement of the objectives set out in Directive 2010/13/EU should be monitored on a regular basis. Moreover, participation in actions funded by the Media strand should be set out on a case-by-case basis in the relevant work programmes.
(35)
The Programme should foster the cooperation between the Union and international organisations such as Unesco, the Council of Europe, including Eurimages and the European Audiovisual Observatory (the ‘Observatory’), the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) and the World Intellectual Property Organisation. The Programme should also support the Union commitment relating to the UN Sustainable Development Goals, in particular its cultural dimension. As regards the audiovisual sector, the Programme should ensure the Union’s contribution to the work of the Observatory.
(36)
Reflecting the importance of tackling climate change in line with the Union’s commitments to implement the Paris Agreement adopted under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and to achieve the UN Sustainable Development Goals, the Programme is intended to contribute to mainstreaming climate actions and to the achievement of an overall target of 30 % of Union budget expenditure supporting climate objectives. In line with the European Green Deal as a blueprint for sustainable growth, the actions under this Regulation should respect the ‘do no harm’ principle. During the implementation of the Programme, relevant actions should be identified and put in place without changing the fundamental character of the Programme, and should be reassessed in the context of the relevant evaluations and review process.
(37)
For simplification and efficiency, the Commission should be able to divide budgetary commitments into annual instalments. In that case, the Commission should commit the annual instalments during the Programme’s implementation, taking into account the progress of the actions that receive financial assistance, their estimated needs and the budget available. The Commission should communicate to the beneficiaries of grants an indicative timetable covering the commitment of the individual annual instalments.
(38)
Horizontal financial rules adopted by the European Parliament and by the Council on the basis of Article 322 TFEU apply to this Regulation. Those rules are laid down in the Regulation (EU, Euratom) 2018/1046 of the European Parliament and of the Council (12) (the ‘Financial Regulation’) and determine in particular the procedure for establishing and implementing the budget through grants, procurement, prizes and indirect implementation, and provide for checks on the responsibility of financial actors. Rules adopted on the basis of Article 322 TFEU also include a general regime of conditionality for the protection of the Union budget.
(39)
‘LUX - the European Audience Film Award by the European Parliament and the European Film Academy’ has established itself as a distinctive European prize, promoting and disseminating European films that reflect European identity and values beyond national borders, and building on collaborations with a community of renowned film creators and European film organisations and networks.
(40)
Since its creation, the European Union Youth Orchestra has developed a unique expertise in promoting access to music, as well as intercultural dialogue, mutual respect and understanding through culture, while also favouring the international career development and training of young musicians. The particularity of the European Union Youth Orchestra lies in the fact that it is a European orchestra, created by a resolution of the European Parliament, that transcends cultural boundaries and is composed of young musicians selected across Europe in accordance with demanding artistic criteria through a rigorous and transparent annual audition process in all Member States. This special contribution to Europe’s cultural diversity and identity should be acknowledged by, for example, providing for actions in which the European Union Youth Orchestra and similar European cultural entities can apply to participate. The possibility of multiannual funding for such entities should be provided for in order to ensure the stability of their functioning.
(41)
Organisations in the cultural and creative sectors with a large European geographical coverage and whose activities entail delivering cultural services directly to the European citizens and that thus have the potential to have direct impact on European identity should be eligible for Union support.
(42)
In order to ensure the efficient allocation of funds from the general budget of the Union, it is necessary that all actions and activities carried out under the Programme provide European added value. It is also necessary to ensure that they complement Member States’ activities. Consistency, complementarity and synergies should be sought with funding programmes that support policy areas with close links to each other, ensuring that potential beneficiaries are aware of the different funding opportunities, and with horizontal policies such as Union competition policy.
(43)
Financial support should be used to address market failures or sub-optimal investment situations in a proportionate manner, and actions should not duplicate or crowd out private financing or distort competition in the internal market.
(44)
It is important that the Programme address the structural challenges of Europe’s cultural and creative sectors, which have been exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic. The Programme encompasses the fundamental role of European culture and media in citizens’ well-being and in empowering them to take informed decisions. The Programme, together with other relevant Union funding programmes and Next Generation EU, should support the short-term recovery of the cultural and creative sectors, enhance their longer-term resilience and competitiveness in order to best address potential major crises in the future and accompany their digital and ecological transition.
(45)
The policy objectives of the Programme are also addressed through financial instruments and budgetary guarantees under the policy windows of the 2021-2027 Invest EU Programme established by Regulation (EU) 2021/523 of the European Parliament and of the Council (13), which, inter alia, continue to facilitate access to finance for small and medium-sized enterprises and organisations in the cultural and creative sectors.
(46)
Impact, quality and efficiency in the implementation of projects under the Programme should constitute key evaluation criteria for the selection of the projects in question. Taking into account the technical expertise required to assess proposals under specific actions of the Programme, members of committees to evaluate such proposals (‘evaluation committees’) may be external experts. When selecting the external experts, due consideration should be paid to their professional backgrounds and to the gender balance of the committee in question.
(47)
The Programme should include a realistic and manageable system of qualitative and quantitative performance indicators to accompany its actions and to monitor its performance on a continuous basis. Such monitoring and information and communication actions relating to the Programme and its actions should build on the three strands of the Programme.
(48)
Considering the importance and complexity of gathering and analysing data and of measuring the impact of cultural policies, the Commission should help to gather evidence and statistical data on the trends and developments of the cultural and creative sectors by making use of its expertise and that of other relevant research institutions and should regularly report to the European Parliament and to the Council on the data gathered.
(49)
The Programme should be established for a period of seven years to align its duration with that of the multiannual financial framework for the years 2021 to 2027 laid down in Council Regulation (EU, Euratom) 2020/2093 (14) (the ‘2021-2027 MFF’).
(50)
This Regulation lays down a financial envelope for the Programme which is to constitute the prime reference amount within the meaning of point 18 of the Interinstitutional Agreement of 16 December 2020 between the European Parliament, the Council of the European Union and the European Commission on budgetary discipline, on cooperation in budgetary matters and on sound financial management, as well as on new own resources, including a roadmap towards the introduction of new own resources (15), for the European Parliament and the Council during the annual budgetary procedure.
(51)
The Financial Regulation applies to this Programme. The Financial Regulation lays down rules on the implementation of the Union budget, including the rules on grants, including those to third parties, prizes, procurement, indirect management, financial instruments, budgetary guarantees, financial assistance and the reimbursement of external experts.
(52)
The forms of funding and the methods of implementation under this Regulation should be chosen on the basis of their ability to achieve the specific objectives of the actions and to deliver results, taking into account, in particular, the costs of controls, the administrative burden, and the need for administrative simplification, in particular in the application process, for the benefit of all parties involved, and the expected risk of non-compliance. When making that choice, the use of lump sums, unit costs and flat rates, as well as financing not linked to costs as referred to in Article 125(1) of the Financial Regulation, should be considered.
(53)
In accordance with the Financial Regulation, Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 883/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council (16) and Council Regulations (EC, Euratom) No 2988/95 (17), (Euratom, EC) No 2185/96 (18) and (EU) 2017/1939 (19), the financial interests of the Union are to be protected by means of proportionate measures, including measures relating to the prevention, detection, correction and investigation of irregularities, including fraud, to the recovery of funds lost, wrongly paid or incorrectly used, and, where appropriate, to the imposition of administrative penalties. In particular, in accordance with Regulations (Euratom, EC) No 2185/96 and (EU, Euratom) No 883/2013, OLAF has the power to carry out administrative investigations, including on-the-spot checks and inspections, with a view to establishing whether there has been fraud, corruption or any other illegal activity affecting the financial interests of the Union. The European Public Prosecutor’s Office (EPPO) is empowered, in accordance with Regulation (EU) 2017/1939, to investigate and prosecute criminal offences affecting the financial interests of the Union as provided for in Directive (EU) 2017/1371 of the European Parliament and of the Council (20). In accordance with the Financial Regulation, any person or entity receiving Union funds is to fully cooperate in the protection of the financial interests of the Union, grant the necessary rights and access to the Commission, OLAF, the Court of Auditors and, in respect of those Member States participating in enhanced cooperation pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2017/1939, the EPPO, and ensure that any third parties involved in the implementation of Union funds grant equivalent rights.
(54)
It should be possible to award quality proposals for actions that are eligible under the Programme but cannot be financed under it due to budgetary constraints with a Seal of Excellence label, based on a specific set of criteria. The Seal of Excellence label recognises the quality of the proposal and simplifies the search for alternative funding under the European Regional Development Fund or the European Social Fund Plus. For actions in respect of which a Seal of Excellence label could be awarded, additional information should be provided in the relevant calls for proposals.
(55)
In view of Article 349 TFEU, and taking into account the communication of the Commission of 24 October 2017 entitled ‘A stronger and renewed strategic partnership with the EU’s outermost regions’, the specific contribution of the regions referred to in that Article to the cultural diversity of the Union, as well as their role in promoting exchanges of, including through mobility, and cooperation with people and organisations from third countries, in particular from their neighbouring countries, should be valued. Pursuant to Council Decision 2013/755/EU (21) and taking into account the contribution of overseas countries and territories to the international cultural influence of the Union, persons and entities established in overseas countries and territories are eligible for funding subject to the rules and objectives of the Programme and possible arrangements applicable to the Member State to which the relevant overseas country or territory is linked. It should thus be possible for people to benefit equally from the competitive advantages that the cultural and creative industries can offer, in particular economic growth and employment.
(56)
In order to ensure the effective assessment of the Programme’s progress towards the achievement of its objectives, the power to adopt acts in accordance with Article 290 TFEU should be delegated to the Commission in respect of developing a monitoring and evaluation framework and of reviewing the Programme indicators. It is of particular importance that the Commission carry out appropriate consultations during its preparatory work, including at expert level, and that those consultations be conducted in accordance with the principles laid down in the Interinstitutional Agreement of 13 April 2016 on Better Law-Making (22). In particular, to ensure equal participation in the preparation of delegated acts, the European Parliament and the Council receive all documents at the same time as Member States’ experts, and their experts systematically have access to meetings of Commission expert groups dealing with the preparation of delegated acts.
(57)
In accordance with Article 193(2) of the Financial Regulation, it is possible to award a grant for an action which has already begun, provided that the applicant can demonstrate the need for starting the action prior to signature of the grant agreement. However, the costs incurred prior to the date of submission of the grant application are not eligible for Union financing, except in duly justified exceptional cases. In accordance with Article 193(4) of the Financial Regulation, the costs incurred prior to the date of submission of the grant application are also not eligible for Union financing in the case of operating grants and the grant agreement is to be signed within four months of the start of the beneficiary’s financial year. In order to avoid any disruption in Union support which could be prejudicial to Union’s interests, it should be possible to provide in the financing decision, for a limited period of time at the beginning of the 2021-2027 MFF, and only in duly justified cases, for the eligibility of activities and costs from 1 January 2021, even if those activities were implemented and those costs incurred before the grant application was submitted.
(58)
Pursuant to paragraphs 22 and 23 of the Interinstitutional Agreement of 13 April 2016 on Better Law-Making, the Programme should be evaluated on the basis of information collected in accordance with specific monitoring requirements, while avoiding an administrative burden, in particular on Member States, and overregulation. Those requirements, where appropriate, should include measurable indicators as a basis for evaluating the effects of the Programme on the ground.
(59)
In order to ensure uniform conditions for the implementation of this Regulation, implementing powers should be conferred on the Commission to adopt the work programmes. Those implementing powers should be exercised in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council (23). In particular, as provided for by this Regulation, time limits should be proportionate and should afford committee members early and effective opportunities to examine the draft implementing act and express their views.
(60)
It is necessary to ensure that the 2014-2020 Creative Europe Programme established by Regulation (EU) No 1295/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council (24) (the ‘2014-2020 Programme’) is closed correctly, in particular as regards the continuation of multiannual arrangements for its management, such as the financing of technical and administrative assistance. As from 1 January 2021, technical and administrative assistance should ensure, where necessary, the management of actions that have not yet been finalised under the 2014-2020 Programme by 31 December 2020.
(61)
This Regulation respects the fundamental rights and observes the principles recognised in particular by the Charter. In particular, this Regulation seeks to ensure full respect for the right to equality between men and women and the right to non-discrimination based on sex, racial or ethnic origin, religion or belief, disability, age or sexual orientation, as enshrined in Articles 21 and 23 of the Charter. This Regulation is also in line with the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.
(62)
Since the objectives of this Regulation cannot be sufficiently achieved by the Member States but can rather, by reason of their transnational character, the high volume and wide geographical scope of the mobility and cooperation activities funded, their effects on access to learning mobility and more generally on Union integration, and their reinforced international dimension, be better achieved at Union level, the Union may adopt measures, in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity, as set out in Article 5 TEU. In accordance with the principle of proportionality, as set out in that Article, this Regulation does not go beyond what is necessary in order to achieve those objectives.
(63)
Regulation (EU) No 1295/2013 should therefore be repealed with effect from 1 January 2021.
(64)
In order to ensure continuity in providing support in the relevant policy area and to allow the implementation to start from the beginning of the 2021-2027 MFF, this Regulation should enter into force as a matter of urgency and should apply, with retroactive effect, from 1 January 2021,
HAVE ADOPTED THIS REGULATION:
