Article 9
Third countries associated to the Programme
1.   The Programme shall be open to the participation of the following third countries, provided that they contribute financially to the Programme:
(a)
Members of the European Free Trade Association which are members of the European Economic Area, in accordance with the conditions laid down in the Agreement on the European Economic Area;
(b)
acceding countries, candidate countries and potential candidates, in accordance with the general principles and general terms and conditions for the participation of those countries in Union programmes established in the respective framework agreements and Association Council decisions or in similar agreements and in accordance with the specific conditions laid down in agreements between the Union and those countries;
(c)
European Neighbourhood Policy countries, in accordance with the general principles and general terms and conditions for the participation of those countries in Union programmes established in the respective framework agreements and Association Council decisions or in similar agreements and in accordance with the specific conditions laid down in agreements between the Union and those countries;
(d)
other third countries, in accordance with the conditions laid down in a specific agreement covering the participation of the third country to any Union programme, provided that the agreement:
(i)
ensures a fair balance as regards the contributions and benefits of the third country participating in the Union programmes;
(ii)
lays down the conditions of participation in the programmes, including the calculation of financial contributions to individual programmes, and their administrative costs;
(iii)
does not confer on the third country a decision-making power in respect of the Union programme;
(iv)
guarantees the rights of the Union to ensure sound financial management and to protect its financial interests.
The contributions referred to in point (d)(ii) of the first subparagraph shall constitute assigned revenues in accordance with Article 21(5) of the Financial Regulation.
2.   The participation of the countries referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article in the Media strand and Cross-sectoral strand shall be subject to the fulfilment of the conditions set out in Directive 2010/13/EU.
3.   The agreements concluded with countries as referred to in point (c) of paragraph 1 may derogate from the obligations set out in paragraph 2 in duly justified cases.
4.   Countries as referred to in points (a) and (b) of paragraph 1 of this Article that fully participated in the 2014-2020 Programme may fully participate in the Programme on a provisional basis if they can show that they have taken tangible steps to align their national law to Directive 2010/13/EU, as amended by Directive (EU) 2018/1808.
5.   Countries as referred to in point (b) of paragraph 1 of this Article shall be allowed to continue to participate in the Programme beyond 31 December 2022 provided that they provide the Commission with evidence showing that they have fulfilled the conditions set out in Directive 2010/13/EU.
6.   Access to the actions corresponding to the priority referred to in point (d) of Article 7(1) shall be ensured for countries that exceptionally participate in the Culture strand but do not fulfil the conditions for participating in the Media strand and Cross-sectoral strand under paragraph 2 of this Article.
