Whereas:
(1)
The Sixth Community Environment Action Programme (3) identifies climate change as a priority for action. That Programme recognises that the Community is committed to achieving an 8 % reduction in emissions of greenhouse gases in the period from 2008 to 2012 compared to 1990 levels, and that, in the longer-term, global emissions of greenhouse gases will need to be reduced by approximately 70 % compared to 1990 levels.
(2)
The ultimate objective of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, which was approved by Council Decision 94/69/EC of 15 December 1993 concerning the conclusion of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (4), is to achieve stabilisation of greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere at a level which prevents dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate system.
(3)
Council Decision 2002/358/EC of 25 April 2002 concerning the approval, on behalf of the European Community, of the Kyoto Protocol to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and the joint fulfilment of commitments thereunder (5) commits the Community and its Member States to reduce their aggregate anthropogenic emissions of greenhouse gases listed in Annex A to the Kyoto Protocol by 8 % compared to 1990 levels in the period from 2008 to 2012.
(4)
Most fluorinated greenhouse gases controlled under the Kyoto Protocol and this Regulation have a high global warming potential.
(5)
Provision should be made for the prevention and minimisation of emissions of fluorinated greenhouse gases, without prejudice to Council Directive 75/442/EEC of 15 July 1975 on waste (6), Council Directive 96/61/EC of 24 September 1996 concerning integrated pollution prevention and control (7), Directive 2000/53/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 September 2000 on end-of life vehicles (8) and Directive 2002/96/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 January 2003 on waste electrical and electronic equipment (WEEE) (9).
(6)
The primary objective of this Regulation is to reduce the emissions of the fluorinated greenhouse gases covered by the Kyoto Protocol and thus to protect the environment. The legal base should therefore be Article 175(1) of the Treaty.
(7)
Nevertheless, it is appropriate to take measures at Community level on the basis of Article 95 of the Treaty to harmonise requirements on the use of fluorinated greenhouse gases and the marketing and labelling of products and equipment containing fluorinated greenhouse gases. Marketing and use restrictions for certain applications of fluorinated greenhouse gases are considered appropriate where viable alternatives are available and improvement of containment and recovery is not feasible. Voluntary initiatives by some industry sectors should also be taken into account, as well as the fact that the development of alternatives is still ongoing.
(8)
The application and enforcement of this Regulation should spur technological innovation by encouraging continued development of alternative technologies and transition to already existing technologies that are more environmentally friendly.
(9)
Member States should facilitate the cross-border shipment of recovered fluorinated greenhouse gases for destruction or reclamation within the Community in accordance with the Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on shipments of waste (10).
(10)
The placing on the market of the products and equipment containing fluorinated greenhouse gases as listed in Annex II is detrimental to the objectives and commitments of the Community and its Member States with regard to climate change and it is therefore necessary to restrict the placing on the market of these products and equipment as regards the Community. This could also be the case concerning other applications containing fluorinated greenhouse gases and therefore the need for an extension of Annex II should be reviewed, taking account of the environmental benefits, the technical feasibility and cost effectiveness.
(11)
Annex II to Decision 2002/358/EC lays down different targets for individual Member States and Member States have adopted different strategies to achieve these targets. Member States should be able to maintain existing national measures adopted in order to meet those targets for a limited period of time in accordance with Article 95 of the Treaty.
(12)
In order to contribute to the fulfilment of the commitments of the Community and its Member States under the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change, the Kyoto Protocol and Decision 2002/358/EC, Directive 2006/40/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 May 2006 relating to emissions from air conditioning systems in motor vehicles and amending Council Directive 70/156/EEC (11) and this Regulation, which both contribute to prevention and minimisation of emissions of fluorinated greenhouse gases, should be adopted and published in the Official Journal of the European Union simultaneously.
(13)
Provision should be made for the monitoring, evaluation and review of the provisions contained in this Regulation.
(14)
Member States should lay down rules on penalties applicable to infringements of this Regulation and ensure that those rules are implemented. Those penalties must be effective, proportionate and dissuasive.
(15)
This Regulation respects the fundamental rights and observes the principles recognised in particular by the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union.
(16)
Since the objectives of this Regulation, namely the containment and reporting of certain fluorinated greenhouse gases and the control of use and placing on the market of products and equipment containing certain fluorinated greenhouse gases, in order to protect the environment and to preserve the internal market, cannot be sufficiently achieved by the Member States and can therefore by reason of the scale and effects of this Regulation be better achieved at Community level, the Community may adopt measures, in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity as set out in Article 5 of the Treaty. In accordance with the principle of proportionality, as set out in that Article, this Regulation does not go beyond what is necessary in order to achieve those objectives.
(17)
The measures necessary for the implementation of this Regulation should be adopted in accordance with Council Decision 1999/468/EC of 28 June 1999 laying down the procedures for the exercise of implementing powers conferred on the Commission (12),
HAVE ADOPTED THIS REGULATION:
