Article 7
Labelling
1.   Without prejudice to the provisions of Directive 67/548/EEC (17) and of Directive 1999/45/EC (18) in respect of the labelling of dangerous substances and preparations, the products and equipment, listed in paragraph 2, containing fluorinated greenhouse gases shall not be placed on the market unless the chemical names of the fluorinated greenhouse gases are identified by way of a label using the accepted industry nomenclature. Such label shall clearly indicate that the product or equipment contains fluorinated greenhouse gases covered by the Kyoto Protocol and their quantity, and this shall be clearly and indelibly stated on the product or equipment, adjacent to the service points for charging or recovering the fluorinated greenhouse gas, or on that part of the product or equipment which contains the fluorinated greenhouse gas. Hermetically sealed systems shall be labelled as such.
Information on the fluorinated greenhouse gases, including their global warming potential, shall be included in the instruction manuals provided for such products and equipment.
2.   Paragraph 1 shall apply to the following types of products and equipment:
(a)
refrigeration products and equipment which contain perfluorocarbons or preparations containing perfluorocarbons;
(b)
refrigeration and air conditioning products and equipment (other than those contained in motor vehicles), heat pumps, fire protection systems and fire extinguishers, if the respective type of product or equipment contains hydrofluorocarbons or preparations containing hydrofluorocarbons;
(c)
switchgear which contains sulphur hexafluoride or preparations containing sulphur hexafluoride; and
(d)
all fluorinated greenhouse gas containers.
3.   The form of the label to be used shall be established in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 12(2). Labelling requirements additional to those set out in paragraph 1 shall, if appropriate, be adopted in accordance with the same procedure. Before submitting a proposal to the Committee referred to in Article 12(1), the Commission shall review the desirability of including additional environmental information, including the global warming potential, on labels, taking due account of existing labelling schemes already applicable to the products and equipment referred to in paragraph 2.
