Article 5
Training and certification
1.   By 4 July 2007, on the basis of information received from Member States and in consultation with the relevant sectors, minimum requirements and the conditions for mutual recognition shall be established in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 12(2) in respect of training programmes and certification for both the companies and the relevant personnel involved in installation, maintenance or servicing of the equipment and systems covered by Article 3(1) as well as for the personnel involved in the activities provided for in Articles 3 and 4.
2.   By 4 July 2008, Member States shall establish or adapt their own training and certification requirements, on the basis of the minimum requirements referred to in paragraph 1. Member States shall notify the Commission of their training and certification programmes. Member States shall give recognition to the certificates issued in another Member State and shall not restrict the freedom to provide services or the freedom of establishment for reasons relating to the certification issued in another Member State.
3.   The operator of the relevant application shall ensure that the relevant personnel have obtained the necessary certification, referred to in paragraph 2, which implies appropriate knowledge of the applicable regulations and standards as well as the necessary competence in emission prevention and recovery of fluorinated greenhouse gases and handling safely the relevant type and size of equipment.
4.   By 4 July 2009 Member States shall ensure that the companies involved in carrying out the activities provided for in Articles 3 and 4 shall only take delivery of fluorinated greenhouse gases where their relevant personnel hold the certificates mentioned in paragraph 2 of this Article.
5.   By 4 July 2007 the Commission shall determine, in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 12(2), the format of the notification referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article.
