Article 52
Delivery and reception of waste
1.   The operator of the waste incineration plant or waste co-incineration plant shall take all necessary precautions concerning the delivery and reception of waste in order to prevent or to limit as far as practicable the pollution of air, soil, surface water and groundwater as well as other negative effects on the environment, odours and noise, and direct risks to human health.
2.   The operator shall determine the mass of each type of waste, if possible according to the European Waste List established by Decision 2000/532/EC, prior to accepting the waste at the waste incineration plant or waste co-incineration plant.
3.   Prior to accepting hazardous waste at the waste incineration plant or waste co-incineration plant, the operator shall collect available information about the waste for the purpose of verifying compliance with the permit requirements specified in Article 45(2).
That information shall cover the following:
(a)
all the administrative information on the generating process contained in the documents mentioned in paragraph 4(a);
(b)
the physical, and as far as practicable, chemical composition of the waste and all other information necessary to evaluate its suitability for the intended incineration process;
(c)
the hazardous characteristics of the waste, the substances with which it cannot be mixed, and the precautions to be taken in handling the waste.
4.   Prior to accepting hazardous waste at the waste incineration plant or waste co-incineration plant, at least the following procedures shall be carried out by the operator:
(a)
the checking of the documents required by Directive 2008/98/EC and, where applicable, those required by Regulation (EC) No 1013/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 14 June 2006 on shipments of waste (37) and by legislation on transport of dangerous goods;
(b)
the taking of representative samples, unless inappropriate as far as possible before unloading, to verify conformity with the information provided for in paragraph 3 by carrying out controls and to enable the competent authorities to identify the nature of the wastes treated.
The samples referred to in point (b) shall be kept for at least 1 month after the incineration or co-incineration of the waste concerned.
5.   The competent authority may grant exemptions from paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 to waste incineration plants or waste co-incineration plants which are a part of an installation covered by Chapter II and only incinerate or co-incinerate waste generated within that installation.
