Article 73
Review
1.   By 7 January 2016, and every 3 years thereafter, the Commission shall submit to the European Parliament and to the Council a report reviewing the implementation of this Directive on the basis of the information referred to in Article 72.
That report shall include an assessment of the need for Union action through the establishment or updating of Union-wide minimum requirements for emission limit values and for rules on monitoring and compliance for activities within the scope of the BAT conclusions adopted during the previous three-year period, on the basis of the following criteria:
(a)
the impact of the activities concerned on the environment as a whole; and
(b)
the state of implementation of best available techniques for the activities concerned.
That assessment shall consider the opinion of the forum referred to in Article 13(4).
Chapter III and Annex V of this Directive shall be considered to represent the Union-wide minimum requirements in the case of large combustion plants.
The report shall be accompanied by a legislative proposal where appropriate. Where the assessment referred to in the second subparagraph identifies such a need, the legislative proposal shall include provisions establishing or updating Union-wide minimum requirements for emission limit values and for rules on monitoring and compliance assessment for the activities concerned.
2.   The Commission shall, by 31 December 2012, review the need to control emissions from:
(a)
the combustion of fuels in installations with a total rated thermal input below 50 MW;
(b)
the intensive rearing of cattle; and
(c)
the spreading of manure.
The Commission shall report the results of that review to the European Parliament and to the Council accompanied by a legislative proposal where appropriate.
3.   The Commission shall report to the European Parliament and the Council, by 31 December 2011, on the establishment in Annex I of:
(a)
differentiated capacity thresholds for the rearing of different poultry species, including the specific case of quail;
(b)
capacity thresholds for the simultaneous rearing of different types of animals within the same installation.
The Commission shall report the results of that review to the European Parliament and to the Council accompanied by a legislative proposal where appropriate.
