Whereas:
(1)
Article 169 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU) provides that the Union is to contribute to the attainment of a high level of consumer protection by the measures it adopts pursuant to Article 114 thereof.
(2)
The free movement of safe and wholesome food is an essential aspect of the internal market and contributes significantly to the health and well-being of citizens, and to their social and economic interests.
(3)
In order to achieve a high level of health protection for consumers and to guarantee their right to information, it should be ensured that consumers are appropriately informed as regards the food they consume. Consumers’ choices can be influenced by, inter alia, health, economic, environmental, social and ethical considerations.
(4)
According to Regulation (EC) No 178/2002 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 28 January 2002 laying down the general principles and requirements of food law, establishing the European Food Safety Authority and laying down procedures in matters of food safety (3) it is a general principle of food law to provide a basis for consumers to make informed choices in relation to food they consume and to prevent any practices that may mislead the consumer.
(5)
Directive 2005/29/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 May 2005 concerning unfair business-to-consumer commercial practices in the internal market (4) covers certain aspects of the provision of information to consumers specifically to prevent misleading actions and omissions of information. The general principles on unfair commercial practices should be complemented by specific rules concerning the provision of food information to consumers.
(6)
Union rules on food labelling applicable to all foods are laid down in Directive 2000/13/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 March 2000 on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the labelling, presentation and advertising of foodstuffs (5). The majority of the provisions laid down in that Directive date back to 1978 and should therefore be updated.
(7)
Council Directive 90/496/EEC of 24 September 1990 on nutrition labelling for foodstuffs (6) lays down rules on the content and presentation of nutrition information on prepacked foods. According to those rules, the inclusion of nutrition information is voluntary unless a nutrition-related claim is made concerning the food. The majority of the provisions laid down in that Directive date back to 1990 and should therefore be updated.
(8)
The general labelling requirements are complemented by a number of provisions applicable to all foods in particular circumstances or to certain categories of foods. In addition, there are a number of specific rules which are applicable to specific foods.
(9)
While the original objectives and the core components of the current labelling legislation are still valid, it is necessary to streamline it in order to ensure easier compliance and greater clarity for stakeholders and to modernise it in order to take account of new developments in the field of food information. This Regulation will both serve the interests of the internal market by simplifying the law, ensuring legal certainty and reducing administrative burden, and benefit citizens by requiring clear, comprehensible and legible labelling of foods.
(10)
The general public has an interest in the relationship between diet and health and in the choice of an appropriate diet to suit individual needs. The Commission White Paper of 30 May 2007 on a Strategy for Europe on Nutrition, Overweight and Obesity related health issues (the ‘Commission White Paper’) noted that nutrition labelling is one important method of informing consumers about the composition of foods and of helping them to make an informed choice. The Commission Communication of 13 March 2007 entitled ‘EU Consumer Policy strategy 2007-2013 — Empowering consumers, enhancing their welfare, effectively protecting them’ underlined that allowing consumers to make an informed choice is essential both to effective competition and consumer welfare. Knowledge of the basic principles of nutrition and appropriate nutrition information on foods would contribute significantly towards enabling the consumer to make such an informed choice. Education and information campaigns are an important mechanism for improving consumer understanding of food information.
(11)
In order to enhance legal certainty and ensure rationality and consistency of enforcement, it is appropriate to repeal Directives 90/496/EEC and 2000/13/EC and to replace them by a single regulation which ensures certainty for consumers and other stakeholders and reduces the administrative burden.
(12)
For the sake of clarity, it is appropriate to repeal and include in this Regulation other horizontal acts, namely Commission Directive 87/250/EEC of 15 April 1987 on the indication of alcoholic strength by volume in the labelling of alcoholic beverages for sale to the ultimate consumer (7), Commission Directive 1999/10/EC of 8 March 1999 providing for derogations from the provisions of Article 7 of Council Directive 79/112/EEC as regards the labelling of foodstuffs (8), Commission Directive 2002/67/EC of 18 July 2002 on the labelling of foodstuffs containing quinine, and of foodstuffs containing caffeine (9), Commission Regulation (EC) No 608/2004 of 31 March 2004 concerning the labelling of foods and food ingredients with added phytosterols, phytosterol esters, phytostanols and/or phytostanol esters (10) and Commission Directive 2008/5/EC of 30 January 2008 concerning the compulsory indication on the labelling of certain foodstuffs of particulars other than those provided for in Directive 2000/13/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (11).
(13)
It is necessary to set common definitions, principles, requirements and procedures so as to form a clear framework and a common basis for Union and national measures governing food information.
(14)
In order to follow a comprehensive and evolutionary approach to the information provided to consumers relating to food they consume, there should be a broad definition of food information law covering rules of a general and specific nature as well as a broad definition of food information covering information provided also by other means than the label.
(15)
Union rules should apply only to undertakings, the concept of which implies a certain continuity of activities and a certain degree of organisation. Operations such as the occasional handling and delivery of food, the serving of meals and the selling of food by private persons, for example at charity events, or at local community fairs and meetings, should not fall within the scope of this Regulation.
(16)
Food information law should provide sufficient flexibility to be able to keep up to date with new information requirements of consumers and ensure a balance between the protection of the internal market and the differences in the perception of consumers in the Member States.
(17)
The prime consideration for requiring mandatory food information should be to enable consumers to identify and make appropriate use of a food and to make choices that suit their individual dietary needs. With this aim, food business operators should facilitate the accessibility of that information to the visually impaired.
(18)
In order to enable food information law to adapt to consumers’ changing needs for information, any considerations about the need for mandatory food information should also take account of the widely demonstrated interest of the majority of consumers in the disclosure of certain information.
(19)
New mandatory food information requirements should however only be established if and where necessary, in accordance with the principles of subsidiarity, proportionality and sustainability.
(20)
Food information law should prohibit the use of information that would mislead the consumer in particular as to the characteristics of the food, food effects or properties, or attribute medicinal properties to foods. To be effective, that prohibition should also apply to the advertising and presentation of foods.
(21)
In order to prevent a fragmentation of the rules concerning the responsibility of food business operators with respect to food information it is appropriate to clarify the responsibilities of food business operators in this area. That clarification should be in accordance with the responsibilities regarding the consumer referred to in Article 17 of Regulation (EC) No 178/2002.
(22)
A list should be drawn up of all mandatory information which should in principle be provided for all foods intended for the final consumer and mass caterers. That list should maintain the information that is already required under existing Union legislation given that it is generally considered as a valuable acquis in respect of consumer information.
(23)
In order to take account of changes and developments in the field of food information, provisions should be made to empower the Commission to enable certain particulars to be made available through alternative means. Consultation with stakeholders should facilitate timely and well-targeted changes of food information requirements.
(24)
When used in the production of foods and still present therein, certain ingredients or other substances or products (such as processing aids) can cause allergies or intolerances in some people, and some of those allergies or intolerances constitute a danger to the health of those concerned. It is important that information on the presence of food additives, processing aids and other substances or products with a scientifically proven allergenic or intolerance effect should be given to enable consumers, particularly those suffering from a food allergy or intolerance, to make informed choices which are safe for them.
(25)
In order to inform consumers of the presence of engineered nanomaterials in food, it is appropriate to provide for a definition of engineered nanomaterials. Taking into account the possibility of food containing or consisting of engineered nanomaterials being a novel food, the appropriate legislative framework for that definition should be considered in the context of the upcoming review of Regulation (EC) No 258/97 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 January 1997 concerning novel foods and novel food ingredients (12).
(26)
Food labels should be clear and understandable in order to assist consumers who want to make better-informed food and dietary choices. Studies show that easy legibility is an important element in maximising the possibility for labelled information to influence its audience and that illegible product information is one of the main causes of consumer dissatisfaction with food labels. Therefore, a comprehensive approach should be developed in order to take into account all aspects related to legibility, including font, colour and contrast.
(27)
In order to ensure the provision of food information, it is necessary to consider all ways of supplying food to consumers, including selling food by means of distance communication. Although it is clear that any food supplied through distance selling should meet the same information requirements as food sold in shops, it is necessary to clarify that in such cases the relevant mandatory food information should also be available before the purchase is concluded.
(28)
The technology used in the freezing of foods has developed significantly during recent decades and has become widely used both to improve the circulation of goods on the Union internal market, and to reduce food safety risks. However, the freezing and later defrosting of certain foods, especially meat and fishery products, limits their possible further use and may also have an effect on their safety, taste and physical quality. Conversely, for other products, especially butter, freezing has no such effects. Therefore, where a product has been defrosted, the final consumer should be appropriately informed of its condition.
(29)
The indication of the country of origin or of the place of provenance of a food should be provided whenever its absence is likely to mislead consumers as to the true country of origin or place of provenance of that product. In all cases, the indication of country of origin or place of provenance should be provided in a manner which does not deceive the consumer and on the basis of clearly defined criteria which ensure a level playing field for industry and improve consumers’ understanding of the information related to the country of origin or place of provenance of a food. Such criteria should not apply to indications related to the name or address of the food business operator.
(30)
In some cases, food business operators may want to indicate the origin of a food on a voluntary basis to draw consumers’ attention to the qualities of their product. Such indications should also comply with harmonised criteria.
(31)
The indication of origin is currently mandatory for beef and beef products (13) in the Union following the bovine spongiform encephalopathy crisis and it has created consumer expectations. The impact assessment of the Commission confirms that the origin of meat appears to be consumers’ prime concern. There are other meats widely consumed in the Union, such as swine, sheep, goat and poultrymeat. It is therefore appropriate to impose a mandatory declaration of origin for those products. The specific origin requirements could differ from one type of meat to another according to the characteristics of the animal species. It is appropriate to provide for the establishment through implementing rules of mandatory requirements that could vary from one type of meat to another taking into account the principle of proportionality and the administrative burden for food business operators and enforcement authorities.
(32)
Mandatory origin provisions have been developed on the basis of vertical approaches for instance for honey (14), fruit and vegetables (15), fish (16), beef and beef products (17) and olive oil (18). There is a need to explore the possibility to extend mandatory origin labelling for other foods. It is therefore appropriate to request the Commission to prepare reports covering the following foods: types of meat other than beef, swine, sheep, goat and poultrymeat; milk; milk used as an ingredient in dairy products; meat used as an ingredient; unprocessed foods; single-ingredient products; and ingredients that represent more than 50 % of a food. Milk being one of the products for which an indication of origin is considered of particular interest, the Commission report on this product should be made available as soon as possible. Based on the conclusions of such reports, the Commission may submit proposals to modify the relevant Union provisions or may take new initiatives, where appropriate, on a sectoral basis.
(33)
The Union’s non-preferential rules of origin are laid down in Council Regulation (EEC) No 2913/92 of 12 October 1992 establishing the Community Customs Code (19) and its implementing provisions in Commission Regulation (EEC) No 2454/93 of 2 July 1993 laying down provisions for the implementation of Council Regulation (EEC) No 2913/92 establishing the Community Customs Code (20). Determination of the country of origin of foods will be based on those rules, which are well known to food business operators and administrations and should ease their implementation.
(34)
The nutrition declaration for a food concerns information on the presence of energy and certain nutrients in foods. The mandatory provision of nutrition information on packaging should assist nutrition actions as part of public health policies which could involve the provision of scientific recommendations for nutrition education for the public and support informed food choices.
(35)
To facilitate the comparison of products in different package sizes, it is appropriate to retain the requirement that the mandatory nutrition declaration should refer to 100 g or 100 ml amounts and, if appropriate, to allow additional portion-based declarations. Therefore, where food is prepacked and individual portions or consumption units are identified, a nutrition declaration per portion or per consumption unit, in addition to the expression per 100 g or per 100 ml, should be allowed. Furthermore, in order to provide comparable indications relating to portions or consumption units, the Commission should be empowered to adopt rules on the expression of the nutrition declaration per portion or per consumption unit for specific categories of food.
(36)
The Commission White Paper highlighted certain nutritional elements of importance to public health such as saturated fat, sugars or sodium. Therefore, it is appropriate that the requirements on the mandatory provision of nutrition information should take into account such elements.
(37)
Since one of the objectives pursued by this Regulation is to provide a basis to the final consumer for making informed choices, it is important to ensure in this respect that the final consumer easily understands the information provided on the labelling. Therefore it is appropriate to use on the labelling the term ‘salt’ instead of the corresponding term of the nutrient ‘sodium’.
(38)
In the interest of consistency and coherence of Union law the voluntary inclusion of nutrition or health claims on food labels should be in accordance with the Regulation (EC) No 1924/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 December 2006 on nutrition and health claims made on foods (21).
(39)
To avoid unnecessary burdens on food business operators, it is appropriate to exempt from the mandatory provision of a nutrition declaration certain categories of foods that are unprocessed or for which nutrition information is not a determining factor for consumers’ purchasing decisions, or for which the packaging is too small to accommodate the mandatory labelling requirements, unless the obligation to provide such information is provided for under other Union rules.
(40)
Taking into account the specific nature of alcoholic beverages, it is appropriate to invite the Commission to analyse further the information requirements for those products. Therefore, the Commission should, taking into account the need to ensure coherence with other relevant Union policies, produce a report within 3 years of the entry into force of this Regulation concerning the application of the requirements to provide information on ingredients and nutrition information to alcoholic beverages. In addition, taking into account the resolution of the European Parliament of 5 September 2007 on an European Union strategy to support Member States in reducing alcohol-related harm (22), the opinion of the European Economic and Social Committee (23), the work of the Commission, and general public concern about alcohol-related harm especially to young and vulnerable consumers, the Commission, after consultation with stakeholders and the Member States, should consider the need for a definition of beverages such as ‘alcopops’, which are specifically targeted at young people. The Commission should also, if appropriate, propose specific requirements relating to alcoholic beverages in the context of this Regulation.
(41)
To appeal to the average consumer and to serve the informative purpose for which it is introduced, and given the current level of knowledge on the subject of nutrition, the nutrition information provided should be simple and easily understood. To have the nutrition information partly in the principal field of vision, commonly known as the ‘front of pack’, and partly on another side on the pack, for instance the ‘back of pack’, might confuse consumers. Therefore, the nutrition declaration should be in the same field of vision. In addition, on a voluntary basis, the most important elements of the nutrition information may be repeated in the principal field of vision, in order to help consumers to easily see the essential nutrition information when purchasing foods. A free choice as to the information that could be repeated might confuse consumers. Therefore it is necessary to clarify which information may be repeated.
(42)
In order to encourage food business operators to provide on a voluntary basis the information contained in the nutrition declaration for foods such as alcoholic beverages and non-prepacked foods that may be exempted from the nutrition declaration, the possibility should be given to declare only limited elements of the nutrition declaration. It is nevertheless appropriate to clearly establish the information that may be provided on a voluntary basis in order to avoid misleading the consumer by the free choice of the food business operator.
(43)
There have been recent developments in the expression of the nutrition declaration, other than per 100 g, per 100 ml or per portion, or in its presentation, through the use of graphical forms or symbols, by some Member States and organisations in the food sector. Such additional forms of expression and presentation may help consumers to better understand the nutrition declaration. However, there is insufficient evidence across all the Union on how the average consumer understands and uses the alternative forms of expression or presentation of the information. Therefore, it is appropriate to allow for different forms of expression and presentation to be developed on the basis of criteria established in this Regulation and to invite the Commission to prepare a report regarding the use of those forms of expression and presentation, their effect on the internal market and the advisability of further harmonisation.
(44)
In order to assist the Commission in producing that report, Member States should provide the Commission with the relevant information on the use of additional forms of expression and presentation of the nutrition declaration on the market in their territory. In order to do so, Member States should be empowered to request food business operators placing on the market in their territory foods bearing additional forms of expression or presentation to notify national authorities of the use of such additional forms and of the relevant justifications regarding the fulfilment of the requirements set out in this Regulation.
(45)
It is desirable to ensure a certain level of consistency in the development of additional forms of expression and presentation of the nutrition declaration. It is therefore appropriate to promote the constant exchange and sharing of best practices and experience between Member States and with the Commission and to promote the participation of stakeholders in such exchanges.
(46)
The declaration in the same field of vision of the amounts of nutritional elements and comparative indicators in an easily recognisable form to enable an assessment of the nutritional properties of a food should be considered in its entirety as part of the nutrition declaration and should not be treated as a group of individual claims.
(47)
Experience shows that in many cases voluntary food information is provided to the detriment of the clarity of the mandatory food information. Therefore, criteria should be provided to help food business operators and enforcement authorities to strike a balance between the provision of mandatory and voluntary food information.
(48)
Member States should retain the right, depending on local practical conditions and circumstances, to lay down rules in respect of the provision of information concerning non-prepacked foods. Although in such cases the consumer demand for other information is limited, information on potential allergens is considered very important. Evidence suggests that most food allergy incidents can be traced back to non-prepacked food. Therefore information on potential allergens should always be provided to the consumer.
(49)
As regards the matters specifically harmonised by this Regulation, Member States should not be able to adopt national provisions unless authorised by Union law. This Regulation should not prevent Member States from adopting national measures concerning matters not specifically harmonised by this Regulation. However, such national measures should not prohibit, impede or restrict the free movement of goods that are in conformity with this Regulation.
(50)
Union consumers show an increasing interest in the implementation of the Union animal welfare rules at the time of slaughter, including whether the animal was stunned before slaughter. In this respect, a study on the opportunity to provide consumers with the relevant information on the stunning of animals should be considered in the context of a future Union strategy for the protection and welfare of animals.
(51)
Food information rules should be able to adapt to a rapidly changing social, economic and technological environment.
(52)
Member States should carry out official controls in order to enforce compliance with this Regulation in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 882/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 29 April 2004 on official controls performed to ensure the verification of compliance with feed and food law, animal health and animal welfare rules (24).
(53)
References to Directive 90/496/EEC in Regulation (EC) No 1924/2006 and in Regulation (EC) No 1925/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 December 2006 on the addition of vitamins and minerals and of certain other substances to foods (25) should be updated to take this Regulation into account. Regulations (EC) No 1924/2006 and (EC) No 1925/2006 should therefore be amended accordingly.
(54)
Irregular and frequent updating of food information requirements may impose considerable administrative burdens on food businesses, especially small and medium-sized enterprises. It is therefore appropriate to ensure that measures that may be adopted by the Commission in exercising the powers conferred by this Regulation apply on the same day in any calendar year following an appropriate transitional period. Derogations from this principle should be permitted in cases of urgency where the purpose of the measures concerned is the protection of human health.
(55)
In order to enable food business operators to adapt the labelling of their products to the new requirements introduced by this Regulation, it is important to provide for appropriate transitional periods for the application of this Regulation.
(56)
Given the substantial changes in the requirements related to nutrition labelling introduced by this Regulation, in particular changes in relation to the content of the nutrition declaration, it is appropriate to authorise food business operators to anticipate the application of this Regulation.
(57)
Since the objectives of this Regulation cannot be sufficiently achieved by the Member States and can therefore be better achieved at Union level, the Union may adopt measures, in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity as set out in Article 5 of the Treaty on European Union. In accordance with the principle of proportionality, as set out in that Article, this Regulation does not go beyond what is necessary in order to achieve those objectives.
(58)
The power to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 290 TFEU should be delegated to the Commission in respect of, inter alia, the availability of certain mandatory particulars by means other than on the package or on the label, the list of foods not required to bear a list of ingredients, the re-examination of the list of substances or products causing allergies or intolerances, or the list of nutrients that may be declared on a voluntary basis. It is of particular importance that the Commission carry out appropriate consultations during its preparatory work, including at expert level. The Commission, when preparing and drawing up delegated acts, should ensure simultaneous, timely and appropriate transmission of relevant documents to the European Parliament and to the Council.
(59)
In order to ensure uniform conditions for the implementation of this Regulation, implementing powers should be conferred on the Commission to adopt implementing acts in relation to, inter alia, the modalities of expression of one or more particulars by means of pictograms or symbols instead of words or numbers, the manner of indicating the date of minimum durability, the manner of indicating the country of origin or place of provenance for meat, the precision of the declared values for the nutrition declaration, or the expression per portion or per consumption unit of the nutrition declaration. Those powers should be exercised in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 February 2011 laying down the rules and general principles concerning mechanisms for control by Member States of the Commission’s exercise of implementing powers (26),
HAVE ADOPTED THIS REGULATION:
