Article 9
List of mandatory particulars
1.   In accordance with Articles 10 to 35 and subject to the exceptions contained in this Chapter, indication of the following particulars shall be mandatory:
(a)
the name of the food;
(b)
the list of ingredients;
(c)
any ingredient or processing aid listed in Annex II or derived from a substance or product listed in Annex II causing allergies or intolerances used in the manufacture or preparation of a food and still present in the finished product, even if in an altered form;
(d)
the quantity of certain ingredients or categories of ingredients;
(e)
the net quantity of the food;
(f)
the date of minimum durability or the ‘use by’ date;
(g)
any special storage conditions and/or conditions of use;
(h)
the name or business name and address of the food business operator referred to in Article 8(1);
(i)
the country of origin or place of provenance where provided for in Article 26;
(j)
instructions for use where it would be difficult to make appropriate use of the food in the absence of such instructions;
(k)
with respect to beverages containing more than 1,2 % by volume of alcohol, the actual alcoholic strength by volume;
(l)
a nutrition declaration.
2.   The particulars referred to in paragraph 1 shall be indicated with words and numbers. Without prejudice to Article 35, they may additionally be expressed by means of pictograms or symbols.
3.   Where the Commission adopts delegated and implementing acts referred to in this Article, the particulars referred to in paragraph 1 may alternatively be expressed by means of pictograms or symbols instead of words or numbers.
In order to ensure that consumers benefit from other means of expression of mandatory food information than words and numbers, and provided that the same level of information as with words and numbers is ensured, the Commission, taking into account evidence of uniform consumer understanding, may establish, by means of delegated acts in accordance with Article 51, the criteria subject to which one or more particulars referred to in paragraph 1 may be expressed by pictograms or symbols instead of words or numbers.
4.   For the purpose of ensuring the uniform implementation of paragraph 3 of this Article, the Commission may adopt implementing acts on the modalities of application of the criteria defined in accordance with paragraph 3 to express one or more particulars by means of pictograms or symbols instead of words or numbers. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 48(2).
