Article 35
Additional forms of expression and presentation
1.   In addition to the forms of expression referred to in Article 32(2) and (4) and Article 33 and to the presentation referred to in Article 34(2), the energy value and the amount of nutrients referred to in Article 30(1) to (5) may be given by other forms of expression and/or presented using graphical forms or symbols in addition to words or numbers provided that the following requirements are met:
(a)
they are based on sound and scientifically valid consumer research and do not mislead the consumer as referred to in Article 7;
(b)
their development is the result of consultation with a wide range of stakeholder groups;
(c)
they aim to facilitate consumer understanding of the contribution or importance of the food to the energy and nutrient content of a diet;
(d)
they are supported by scientifically valid evidence of understanding of such forms of expression or presentation by the average consumer;
(e)
in the case of other forms of expression, they are based either on the harmonised reference intakes set out in Annex XIII, or in their absence, on generally accepted scientific advice on intakes for energy or nutrients;
(f)
they are objective and non-discriminatory; and
(g)
their application does not create obstacles to the free movement of goods.
2.   Member States may recommend to food business operators the use of one or more additional forms of expression or presentation of the nutrition declaration that they consider as best fulfilling the requirements laid down in points (a) to (g) of paragraph 1. Member States shall provide the Commission with the details of such additional forms of expression and presentation.
3.   Member States shall ensure an appropriate monitoring of additional forms of expression or presentation of the nutrition declaration that are present on the market in their territory.
To facilitate the monitoring of the use of such additional forms of expression or presentation, Member States may require food business operators placing on the market in their territory foods bearing such information to notify the competent authority of the use of an additional form of expression or presentation and to provide them with the relevant justifications regarding the fulfilment of the requirements laid down in points (a) to (g) of paragraph 1. In such cases, information on the discontinuation of the use of such additional forms of expression or presentation may also be required.
4.   The Commission shall facilitate and organise the exchange of information between Member States, itself and stakeholders on matters relating to the use of any additional forms of expression or presentation of the nutrition declaration.
5.   By 13 December 2017, in the light of the experience gained, the Commission shall submit a report to the European Parliament and the Council on the use of additional forms of expression and presentation, on their effect on the internal market and on the advisability of further harmonisation of those forms of expression and presentation. For this purpose, Member States shall provide the Commission with relevant information concerning the use of such additional forms of expression or presentation on the market in their territory. The Commission may accompany this report with proposals to modify the relevant Union provisions.
6.   In order to ensure the uniform application of this Article, the Commission shall adopt implementing acts setting out detailed rules concerning the implementation of paragraphs 1, 3 and 4 of this Article. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 48(2).
