Article 33
Expression on a per portion basis or per consumption unit
1.   In the following cases, the energy value and the amounts of nutrients referred to in Article 30(1) to (5) may be expressed per portion and/or per consumption unit, easily recognisable by the consumer, provided that the portion or the unit used is quantified on the label and that the number of portions or units contained in the package is stated:
(a)
in addition to the form of expression per 100 g or per 100 ml referred to in Article 32(2);
(b)
in addition to the form of expression per 100 g or per 100 ml referred to in Article 32(3) regarding the amounts of vitamins and minerals;
(c)
in addition to or instead of the form of expression per 100 g or per 100 ml referred to in Article 32(4).
2.   By way of derogation from Article 32(2), in the cases referred to in point (b) of Article 30(3) the amount of nutrients and/or the percentage of the reference intakes set out in Part B of Annex XIII may be expressed on the basis of per portion or per consumption unit alone.
When the amounts of nutrients are expressed on the basis of per portion or per consumption unit alone in accordance with the first subparagraph, the energy value shall be expressed per 100 g or per 100 ml and on the basis of per portion or per consumption unit.
3.   By way of derogation from Article 32(2), in the cases referred to in Article 30(5) the energy value and the amount of nutrients and/or the percentage of the reference intakes set out in Part B of Annex XIII may be expressed on the basis of per portion or per consumption unit alone.
4.   The portion or unit used shall be indicated in close proximity to the nutrition declaration.
5.   In order to ensure the uniform implementation of the expression of the nutrition declaration per portion or per unit of consumption and to provide for a uniform basis of comparison for the consumer, the Commission shall, taking into account actual consumption behaviour of consumers as well as dietary recommendations, adopt, by means of implementing acts, rules on the expression per portion or per consumption unit for specific categories of foods. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 48(2).
