Article 23
FuelEU penalties
1.   Before 1 May of the verification period, on the basis of the calculations undertaken pursuant to Article 16(4) and after possible application of Articles 20 and 21, the verifier shall record in the FuelEU database the verified compliance balances of the ship for GHG intensity as referred to in Article 4(2) and, if applicable, for the subtarget for RFNBO as referred to in Article 5(3).
If a ship has a compliance deficit for the subtarget for RFNBO as referred to in Article 5(3), the FuelEU penalty shall be calculated in accordance with the formula specified in Part B of Annex IV.
2.   The administering State in respect of a company shall ensure that, for any of its ships having a compliance deficit for GHG intensity as referred to in Article 4(2) or, if applicable, for the subtarget for RFNBO as referred to in Article 5(3) on 1 June of the verification period, after a possible validation by its competent authority, the company shall pay by 30 June of the verification period an amount equal to the FuelEU penalty resulting from the application of the formulas specified in Part B of Annex IV. If a ship has a compliance deficit for two consecutive reporting periods or more, that amount shall be multiplied by 1 + (n -1)/10, where n is the number of consecutive reporting periods for which the company is subject to a FuelEU penalty for that ship.
3.   The administering State in respect of a company shall ensure that, for any of its ships which is in the situation referred to in Article 20(4), the company pays by 30 June of the verification period an amount equal to the FuelEU penalty notified pursuant to that paragraph.
4.   Before 1 May of the verification period, where applicable on the basis of the calculations undertaken in accordance with Article 16(4), the verifier shall record in the FuelEU database the total number of hours spent moored at the quayside by the ship in non-compliance with the requirements set out in Article 6.
5.   The administering State in respect of a company shall ensure that for any of its ships which made at least one non-compliant port call, after a possible validation by its competent authority, the company shall pay by 30 June of the verification period an amount equal to the FuelEU penalty resulting from the multiplication of EUR 1,5 by the established total electrical power demand of the ship at berth and by the total number of hours rounded up to the nearest whole hour, spent at berth by the ship in non-compliance with the requirements set out in Article 6.
6.   Member States shall have the necessary legal and administrative framework in place at national level to ensure the fulfilment of the obligations concerning the imposition, payment and collection of the FuelEU penalties.
7.   The actions referred to in this Article as well as the proof of the payments of FuelEU penalties shall be recorded without delay in the FuelEU database by the entities that performed those actions or made that payment.
8.   The company shall remain responsible for the payment of the FuelEU penalties, without prejudice to the possibility for the company to conclude contractual agreements with the commercial operators of the ship that provide for the liability of the commercial operators to reimburse the company for the payment of the FuelEU penalties, when the responsibility for the purchase of the fuel or the operation of the ship is assumed by the commercial operator. For the purposes of this paragraph, operation of the ship shall mean determining the cargo carried, the route and the speed of the ship.
9.   The company shall remain responsible for the payment of the FuelEU penalties, without prejudice to the possibility for the company to conclude contractual agreements with fuel suppliers that provide for the liability of the fuel suppliers to reimburse the company for the payment of the FuelEU penalties.
10.   The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 28 to amend Annex IV in order to adapt the factor indicated in cell 7 and, where applicable, cell 14 of the table in Part B of that Annex and used in the formula referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article, based on the developments in the cost of energy, and to amend the multiplication factor laid down in paragraph 5 of this Article, based on the indexation of the average cost of electricity in the Union.
11.   Member States shall endeavour to ensure that the revenue generated from the FuelEU penalties, or its equivalent financial value, is used to support the rapid deployment and the use of renewable and low-carbon fuels in the maritime sector, by stimulating the production of greater quantities of renewable and low-carbon fuels for the maritime sector, facilitating the construction of appropriate bunkering facilities or OPS infrastructure in ports, and supporting the development, testing and deployment of the most innovative technologies in the fleet to achieve significant emission reductions.
By 30 June 2030, and every five years thereafter, Member States shall make public a report on the use of revenue generated from the Fuel EU penalties over the five-year period preceding the year of every such report, including information on the beneficiaries and the level of expenditure concerning the objectives listed in the first subparagraph.
