Article 14
Accreditation of verifiers
1.   Verifiers shall be accredited for verification activities falling under the scope of this Regulation by a national accreditation body pursuant to Regulation (EC) No 765/2008. By the end of each year, the national accreditation body shall notify the list of accredited verifiers to the Commission, together with all relevant contact information.
2.   Where no specific provisions concerning the accreditation of verifiers are laid down in this Regulation, the relevant provisions of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 shall apply.
3.   Verifiers shall always have sufficient means and staff to enable them to deal with the size of the fleet for which they perform verification activities under this Regulation. In particular, verifiers shall always have sufficient expertise, particularly in maritime transport, to enable them to carry out the tasks required under this Regulation. They shall be capable of assigning means and staff to every place of work, when and as needed to carry out the tasks required under this Regulation.
4.   A competent authority that identifies the non-conformity of a verifier’s activities within the scope of this Regulation shall inform the competent authority of the Member State of the national accreditation body having accredited the verifier. The competent authority of the Member State of the national accreditation body shall request its national accreditation body to take into account that information as part of its surveillance activities.
5.   The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 28 in order to supplement this Regulation by establishing further methods and criteria of accreditation of verifiers, on at least the following elements: request for accreditation for verification activities within the scope of this Regulation; assessment of verifiers by the national accreditation bodies; surveillance activities performed by the national accreditation bodies to confirm the continuation of the accreditation; administrative measures to be adopted if the verifier does not fulfil the requirements of this Regulation; and requirements for national accreditation bodies in order to be competent to provide accreditation to verifiers for verification activities within the scope of this Regulation, including a reference to harmonised standards. The methods and criteria specified in such delegated acts shall be based on the principles for verification provided for in Articles 11, 12 and 13 and on relevant internationally accepted standards.

Chapter V


Recording, verification, reporting and assessment of compliance

