Article 25
Enforcement
1.   Member States shall lay down the rules on sanctions applicable to infringements of this Regulation and shall take all measures necessary to ensure that they are implemented. The sanctions provided for shall be effective, proportionate and dissuasive. Member States shall notify the Commission of those rules and of those measures and shall notify it, without delay, of any subsequent amendment affecting them.
2.   Each Member State shall ensure that any inspection of a ship in a port under its jurisdiction carried out in accordance with Directive 2009/16/EC includes checking that the ship holds a valid FuelEU document of compliance.
3.   Where a ship fails to comply with the obligation set out in Article 24 for two or more consecutive reporting periods, and where other enforcement measures have failed to ensure compliance with this Regulation, the competent authority of the Member State of the port of call may, in respect of a ship not flying the flag of that Member State and after giving the opportunity to the company concerned to submit its observations, issue an expulsion order. Where the competent authority of the Member State of the port of call decides to issue an expulsion order, it shall notify that order to the Commission, the other Member States and the flag State concerned through the FuelEU database. Every Member State, with the exception of the Member State whose flag the ship is flying, shall refuse entry of the ship which is subject to the expulsion order into any of its ports until the company fulfils its obligations. Where a ship fails to comply with the obligation set out in Article 24 for two or more consecutive reporting periods and enters into a port of the Member State whose flag it flies, the Member State concerned shall, while that ship is in one of its ports, after giving the opportunity to the company concerned to submit its observations, order a flag detention until the company fulfils its obligations.
4.   The company concerned shall confirm compliance with the obligation to hold a valid FuelEU document of compliance by notifying a valid FuelEU document of compliance to the competent national authority which issued the expulsion order. This paragraph shall be without prejudice to the provisions of international law applicable in the case of ships in distress.
5.   Sanctions against a specific ship by any Member State shall be notified to the Commission, to the other Member States and to the flag State concerned through the FuelEU database.
