Article 13
Verification procedures
1.   The verifier shall identify potential risks related to the monitoring and reporting process by comparing the reported amount, type and emission factor of the energy used on board by ships with estimated data based on the ship’s tracking data and characteristics, such as the installed engine power. Where significant divergences are found, the verifier shall carry out further analyses.
2.   The verifier shall identify potential risks related to the different calculation steps by reviewing all data sources and methodologies used by the company concerned.
3.   The verifier shall take into consideration any effective risk control methods applied by the company concerned to reduce levels of uncertainty associated with the accuracy specific to the monitoring methods used.
4.   At the request of the verifier, the company concerned shall provide any additional information that enables the verifier to carry out its verification activities. Where necessary to determine the reliability, credibility, accuracy and completeness of reported data and information, the verifier shall conduct checks during the verification process. In case of doubt, the verifier may conduct site visits at the premises of the company or on board the ship. The company shall allow the verifier to access the premises of the company or the ship in order to facilitate the verification activities.
5.   The Commission shall adopt implementing acts in order to further specify the rules for the verification activities referred to in this Regulation, as regards at least the following elements: competencies of verifiers; documents to be provided by companies to verifiers; assessment of the conformity of the monitoring plan and of the modified monitoring plan; risk assessment, including checks, to be carried out by verifiers; verification of the FuelEU report referred to in Article 15(3); materiality level; reasonable assurance from verifiers; misstatements and non-conformities; content of the verification report; recommendations for improvements; site visits; and communication between companies, verifiers, competent authorities and the Commission. The rules specified in those implementing acts shall be based on the principles for verification provided for in Articles 11 and 12 and in this Article and on relevant internationally accepted standards. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 29(3).
