Article 13
One-stop shop for application for infrastructure capacity
1.   The management board for a freight corridor shall designate or set up a joint body for applicants to request and to receive answers, in a single place and in a single operation, regarding infrastructure capacity for freight trains crossing at least one border along the freight corridor (hereinafter referred to as a ‘one-stop shop’).
2.   The one-stop shop shall, as a coordination tool, also provide basic information concerning the allocation of the infrastructure capacity, including the information referred in Article 18. It shall display infrastructure capacity available at the time of request and its characteristics in accordance with pre-defined parameters, such as speed, length, loading gauge or axle load authorised for trains running on the freight corridor.
3.   The one-stop shop shall take a decision with regard to applications for pre-arranged train paths specified in Article 14(3) and for the reserve capacity specified in Article 14(5). It shall allocate the capacity in line with rules regarding capacity allocation as set out in Directive 2001/14/EC. It shall inform the competent infrastructure managers of these applications and the decision taken without delay.
4.   For any request of infrastructure capacity which cannot be met pursuant to paragraph 3, the one-stop shop shall forward the application for infrastructure capacity without any delay to the competent infrastructure managers and, where relevant, the allocation bodies as referred to in Article 14(2) of Directive 2001/14/EC, who shall take a decision on that application in accordance with Article 13 and Chapter III of that Directive and communicate this decision to the one-stop shop for further processing.
5.   The activities of the one-stop shop shall be carried out in a transparent and non-discriminatory manner. To this end a register shall be kept which shall be made freely available to all interested parties. It shall contain the dates of the requests, names of the applicants, details of documentation supplied and of incidents which have occurred. These activities shall be subject to the control of the regulatory bodies in accordance with Article 20.
