Article 9
Measures for implementing the freight corridor plan
1.   The management board shall draw up an implementation plan at the latest 6 months before making the freight corridor operational and shall submit it for approval to the executive board. This plan shall include:
(a)
a description of the characteristics of the freight corridor, including bottlenecks, and the programme of measures necessary for creating the freight corridor;
(b)
the essential elements of the study referred to in paragraph 3;
(c)
the objectives for the freight corridors, in particular in terms of performance of the freight corridor expressed as the quality of the service and the capacity of the freight corridor in accordance with the provisions of Article 19;
(d)
the investment plan referred to in Article 11; and
(e)
the measures to implement the provisions of Articles 12 to 19.
2.   The management board shall periodically review the implementation plan taking into account progress made in its implementation, the rail freight market on the freight corridor and performance measured in accordance with the objectives referred to in point (c) of paragraph 1.
3.   The management board shall carry out and periodically update a transport market study relating to the observed and expected changes in the traffic on the freight corridor, as a consequence of its being established, covering the different types of traffic, both regarding the transport of freight and the transport of passengers. This study shall also review, where necessary, the socio-economic costs and benefits stemming from the establishment of the freight corridor.
4.   The implementation plan shall take into account the development of terminals to meet the needs of rail freight running on the freight corridor, in particular by acting as intermodal nodes along the freight corridors.
5.   The management board shall, as appropriate, take measures to cooperate with regional and/or local administrations in respect of the implementation plan.
