Article 3
Scientific advice on climate change
1.   The European Scientific Advisory Board on Climate Change established under Article 10a of Regulation (EC) No 401/2009 (the ‘Advisory Board’) shall serve as a point of reference for the Union on scientific knowledge relating to climate change by virtue of its independence and scientific and technical expertise.
2.   The tasks of the Advisory Board shall include:
(a)
considering the latest scientific findings of the IPCC reports and scientific climate data, in particular with regard to information relevant to the Union;
(b)
providing scientific advice and issuing reports on existing and proposed Union measures, climate targets and indicative greenhouse gas budgets, and their coherence with the objectives of this Regulation and the Union’s international commitments under the Paris Agreement;
(c)
contributing to the exchange of independent scientific knowledge in the field of modelling, monitoring, promising research and innovation which contribute to reducing emissions or increasing removals;
(d)
identifying actions and opportunities needed to successfully achieve the Union climate targets;
(e)
raising awareness on climate change and its impacts, as well as stimulating dialogue and cooperation between scientific bodies within the Union, complementing existing work and efforts.
3.   The Advisory Board shall be guided in its work by the best available and most recent scientific evidence, including the latest reports of the IPCC, IPBES and other international bodies. It shall follow a fully transparent process and make its reports publicly available. It may take into account, where available, the work of the national climate advisory bodies referred to in paragraph 4.
4.   In the context of enhancing the role of science in the field of climate policy, each Member State is invited to establish a national climate advisory body, responsible for providing expert scientific advice on climate policy to the relevant national authorities as prescribed by the Member State concerned. Where a Member State decides to establish such an advisory body, it shall inform the EEA thereof.
