Article 12
Amendments to Regulation (EC) No 401/2009
Regulation (EC) No 401/2009 is amended as follows:
(1)
the following article is inserted:
‘Article 10a
1.   A European Scientific Advisory Board on Climate Change (the “Advisory Board”) is hereby established.
2.   The Advisory Board shall be composed of 15 senior scientific experts covering a broad range of relevant disciplines. Members of the Advisory Board shall meet the criteria set out in paragraph 3. No more than two members of the Advisory Board shall hold the nationality of the same Member State. The independence of the members of the Advisory Board shall be beyond doubt.
3.   The Management Board shall designate the members of the Advisory Board for a term of four years, which shall be renewable once, following an open, fair and transparent selection procedure. In its selection of the members of the Advisory Board, the Management Board shall seek to ensure a varied disciplinary and sectoral expertise, as well as gender and geographical balance. The selection shall be based on the following criteria:
(a)
scientific excellence;
(b)
experience in carrying out scientific assessments and providing scientific advice in the fields of expertise;
(c)
broad expertise in the field of climate and environment sciences or other scientific fields relevant for the achievement of the Union’s climate objectives;
(d)
professional experience in an inter-disciplinary environment in an international context.
4.   The members of the Advisory Board shall be appointed in a personal capacity and shall give their positions completely independently of the Member States and the Union institutions. The Advisory Board shall elect its chairperson from among its members for a period of four years and it shall adopt its rules of procedure.
5.   The Advisory Board shall complement the work of the Agency while acting independently in discharging its tasks. The Advisory Board shall establish its annual work programme independently, and when doing so it shall consult the Management Board. The chairperson of the Advisory Board shall inform the Management Board and the Executive Director of that programme and its implementation.’;
(2)
in Article 11, the following paragraph is added:
‘5.   The Agency’s budget shall also include the expenditure relating to the Advisory Board.’.
