Article 6
Assessment of Union progress and measures
1.   By 30 September 2023, and every five years thereafter, the Commission shall assess, together with the assessment provided for under Article 29(5) of Regulation (EU) 2018/1999:
(a)
the collective progress made by all Member States towards the achievement of the climate-neutrality objective set out in Article 2(1) of this Regulation;
(b)
the collective progress made by all Member States on adaptation as referred to in Article 5 of this Regulation.
The Commission shall submit the conclusions of that assessment, together with the State of the Energy Union report prepared in the respective calendar year in accordance with Article 35 of Regulation (EU) 2018/1999, to the European Parliament and to the Council.
2.   By 30 September 2023, and every five years thereafter, the Commission shall review:
(a)
the consistency of Union measures with the climate-neutrality objective set out in Article 2(1);
(b)
the consistency of Union measures with ensuring progress on adaptation as referred to in Article 5.
3.   Where, based on the assessments referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article, the Commission finds that Union measures are inconsistent with the climate-neutrality objective set out in Article 2(1) or inconsistent with ensuring progress on adaptation as referred to in Article 5, or that the progress towards that climate-neutrality objective or on adaptation as referred to in Article 5 is insufficient, it shall take the necessary measures in accordance with the Treaties.
4.   The Commission shall assess the consistency of any draft measure or legislative proposal, including budgetary proposals, with the climate-neutrality objective set out in Article 2(1) and the Union 2030 and 2040 climate targets before adoption, and include that assessment in any impact assessment accompanying these measures or proposals, and make the result of that assessment publicly available at the time of adoption. The Commission shall also assess whether those draft measures or legislative proposals, including budgetary proposals, are consistent with ensuring progress on adaptation as referred to in Article 5. When making its draft measures and legislative proposals, the Commission shall endeavour to align them with the objectives of this Regulation. In any case of non-alignment, the Commission shall provide the reasons as part of the consistency assessment referred to in this paragraph.
