Article 9
Consent by the competent authorities and time periods for shipment, recovery or disposal
1.   The competent authorities of destination, dispatch and transit shall take, within 30 days of the date on which the notifier has been informed in accordance with Article 8(12) that the notification has been properly completed, one of the following decisions, which shall be duly reasoned, as regards the shipment:
(a)
to consent without conditions;
(b)
to consent with conditions in accordance with Article 10;
(c)
to raise an objection in accordance with Article 12;
(d)
not to consent, where the conditions referred to in Article 11 are not fulfilled.
By way of derogation from the first subparagraph, the competent authority of dispatch may take a decision in accordance with the first subparagraph, point (c) or (d), after having received the notification and before having considered it properly carried out, if it is evident that the conditions in Article 11 have not been fulfilled or that there are grounds for objection in accordance with Article 12.
By way of derogation from the first subparagraph, a competent authority concerned may take a decision in accordance with the first subparagraph, point (c) or (d), before the date on which the notifier has been informed in accordance with Article 8(12), once the notification has been properly carried out, as referred to in Article 5(5).
Tacit consent by the competent authorities of transit may be assumed if no objection is lodged within the 30-day time limit referred to in the first subparagraph.
2.   The competent authorities of dispatch, destination, and, where appropriate, transit, shall inform the notifier of their decision and the reasons therefor within the 30-day time limit referred to in paragraph 1, first subparagraph, and inform the other competent authorities concerned of that decision. The competent authority shall immediately inform the notifier and the other competent authorities concerned of decisions taken in accordance with paragraph 1, second and third subparagraphs.
Tacit consents referred to in the paragraph 1, fourth subparagraph, shall be valid for the period indicated in the written consent given in accordance with the first subparagraph by the competent authority of destination.
Where, within 30 days of the date on which the notifier, the competent authority of dispatch or a competent authority of transit concerned has been informed in accordance with Article 8(12), any of the competent authorities concerned has not taken a decision in accordance with paragraph 1, first subparagraph, it shall provide the notifier with a reasoned explanation upon request.
3.   If a notifier submits a notification in accordance with Article 5 and, where relevant, with Article 13, to ship, compared to a consented notification, the same type of waste from the same location in the country of dispatch to the same consignee and the same facility and whereby the countries of transit, if any, are the same, the competent authorities concerned shall take into consideration any information previously submitted in accordance with Article 5(2), (3) and (4) or Article 13(2) and (3) and shall take a decision in accordance with paragraph 1 of this Article as soon as possible.
4.   A written consent to a shipment shall expire on the earliest date at the end of validity periods as indicated by the competent authorities concerned. It shall not cover a period of more than one year.
5.   The shipment shall take place only after fulfilment of the requirements set out in Article 16(1) and (2) and during the period of validity of the tacit or written consent of all competent authorities concerned in accordance with paragraph 4 of this Article. The waste shall have been received by the facility for recovery or disposal before the end of the period of validity of the tacit or written consent of all competent authorities concerned.
6.   The recovery or disposal of waste in relation to a shipment shall be completed no later than one year after the receipt of the waste by the facility that recovers or disposes of the waste, unless a shorter period is indicated by the competent authorities concerned in their decision.
7.   The competent authorities concerned shall withdraw their tacit or written consent, at the request of the notifier or where they have knowledge of any of the following:
(a)
the composition of the waste is not as notified;
(b)
the conditions imposed on the shipment are not respected;
(c)
the waste is not recovered or disposed of in compliance with the permit of the facility that carries out the recovery or disposal;
(d)
the waste is to be, or has been, shipped, recovered or disposed of in a way that is not in accordance with the information supplied in, or annexed to, the notification and movement documents;
(e)
the termination of the financial guarantee;
(f)
the termination of the contract.
8.   The competent authority concerned shall inform the notifier, the other competent authorities concerned and the consignee of any withdrawal of consent, including the reason for such withdrawal.
9.   Where consent by any of the competent authorities concerned is withdrawn in accordance with paragraph 7 of this Article, the shipment or the treatment of the waste shall, where applicable, not be allowed to continue and Article 22 or 25 shall apply, as relevant.
