Article 5
Notification
1.   Where a notifier intends to ship waste referred to in Article 4(1), (2) or (3), the notifier shall submit a prior written notification (‘notification’) to all competent authorities concerned.
A notifier referred to in Article 3, point (6)(a)(ii), (iii) or (iv), may only submit a notification where the notifier has obtained a permit or is registered in accordance with Chapter IV of Directive 2008/98/EC.
Where a notifier submits a general notification for several shipments as referred to in Article 13, the notifier shall also comply with the requirements laid down in that Article.
Where a shipment is destined for a pre-consented facility pursuant to Article 14, the procedural requirements in paragraphs 12, 14, 15 and 16 of that Article shall apply.
Where a shipment is destined for interim recovery or interim disposal, Article 15 shall also apply.
2.   The notification shall include the following documents:
(a)
the notification document set out in Annex IA (‘the notification document’);
(b)
the movement document set out in Annex IB (‘the movement document’).
The notifier shall provide the information indicated in the notification document and, where relevant, the information indicated in the movement document.
When the notifier is not the original waste producer as referred to in Article 3, point (6)(a)(i), the notifier shall ensure that the original waste producer or one of the persons indicated in Article 3, point (6)(a)(ii), (iii) or (v), where practicable, also signs the notification document. A dealer or broker shall ensure they have a written authorisation from one of the persons referred to in Article 3, point (6)(a)(i), (ii) or (iii), to act on their behalf, and that such written authorisation is included in the notification.
3.   The notification document or annex thereto shall contain the information and documentation listed in Part 1 of Annex II. The movement document or annex thereto shall contain the information and documentation referred to in Part 2 of Annex II, to the extent possible at the time of notification.
4.   Where requested by any of the competent authorities concerned, the notifier shall provide the information and documentation required under paragraph 3 and the additional information and documentation set out in Part 3 of Annex II to all competent authorities concerned. The competent authority which made the request shall inform the other competent authorities concerned of that request.
5.   A notification shall be considered properly carried out once the competent authority of dispatch is satisfied that the notification document and movement document have been completed in accordance with paragraphs 3 and 4.
6.   A notification shall be considered properly completed once all the competent authorities concerned are satisfied that the notification document and movement document have been completed in accordance with paragraphs 3 and 4 or once all information and documentation requested by them in accordance with paragraph 4 have been received.
7.   The notifier shall provide a copy of the contract concluded in accordance with Article 6 and a declaration certifying its existence in accordance with Annex IA to the competent authorities concerned at the time of notification.
8.   The notifier shall provide a declaration that a financial guarantee or equivalent insurance has been established in accordance with Article 7 by completing the appropriate part of the notification document.
The financial guarantee or equivalent insurance as referred to in Article 7 or, if the competent authorities concerned so allow, a declaration certifying its existence in accordance with the form set out in Annex IA shall be provided to the competent authorities concerned as part of the notification document at the time of notification.
By way of derogation from the second subparagraph, the documentation referred to in that subparagraph may, where the competent authorities concerned so allow, be provided after the notification is submitted, at the latest at the time of completion of the movement document in accordance with Article 16(2).
9.   The notification shall cover the shipment from the location from which the shipment starts and cover any interim or non-interim recovery or interim or non-interim disposal.
Where subsequent interim or non-interim recovery or subsequent interim or non-interim disposal is carried out in a country other than the first country of destination, the non-interim recovery or non-interim disposal and the location of that recovery or disposal shall be indicated in the notification and Article 15(7) applies.
10.   Only one waste identification code as mentioned in Annex III, Annex IIIA, Annex IIIB or Annex IV shall be specified in the notification document and the movement document. In cases where wastes are not classified under one single entry in either Annex III, Annex IIIB or Annex IV, only one waste identification code from the list of waste referred to in Article 7 of Directive 2008/98/EC shall be specified in the notification document and the movement document, except for:
(a)
wastes not classified under one single entry in either Annex III, Annex IIIB or Annex IV which can be specified using more than one waste identification code from the list of waste referred to in Article 7 of Directive 2008/98/EC, where all waste covered by the notification has essentially similar physical and chemical characteristics, but is not a mixture of wastes; or
(b)
mixtures of wastes not classified under one single entry in either Annex III, Annex IIIA, Annex IIIB or Annex IV, for which the waste identification code from the list of waste referred to in Article 7 of Directive 2008/98/EC and the waste identification code from either Annex III, IIIB or IV for each fraction of the waste shall be specified in order of importance in the notification document and the movement document, or where those identification codes are not available for all fractions, the waste identification code from the list of waste referred to in Article 7 of Directive 2008/98/EC for the mixture as well as for each fraction of the waste shall be specified in order of importance in the notification document and the movement document.
11.   Wastes or mixtures of wastes specified in accordance with paragraph 10of this Article may be further specified by providing the relevant waste identification codes from the list of waste referred to in Article 7 of Directive 2008/98/EC and other relevant identification codes.
