Article 69
Requests for information
1.   The Commission may interview any natural or legal person who consents to be interviewed for the purpose of collecting all necessary information relating to the relevant waste shipments.
2.   Where such an interview is conducted in the premises of an establishment, undertaking, broker or dealer, the Commission shall inform the permanent staff responsible for cooperation or the focal points referred to in Article 65(2) in the Member State concerned in whose territory the interview takes place. If so requested by the authority of that Member State, its officials may assist the staff of the Commission to conduct the interview.
The invitation to an interview shall be sent to the person in question with at least 10 working days’ notice. That notice period may be shortened with the express consent of the person concerned or on duly reasoned grounds of urgency of the inspection.
In the latter case, the notice period shall not be less than 24 hours. The invitation shall include a list of the rights of the person concerned, in particular the right to be assisted by a person of his or her choice.
3.   The Commission may request legal or natural persons responsible for an establishment or an undertaking, or any broker and dealer to provide all necessary information relating to the relevant waste shipments. The Commission shall state the legal basis and the purpose of the request, specify what information is required and fix the time-limit within which the information is to be provided.
4.   The Commission shall without delay make available the request to the relevant authorities of the Member State in whose territory the seat of the establishment, undertaking, broker or dealer is situated and to the authorities of the Member State whose territory is affected.
5.   Where the establishment, undertaking, broker or dealer does not provide the requested information, or the Commission considers the information it received to be insufficient to reach a conclusion, the second sentence of Article 61(6) shall apply, mutatis mutandis.
