Article 18
General information requirements
1.   Shipments of waste referred to in Article 4(4) and (5) shall be subject to the general information requirements set out in paragraphs 2 to 10 of this Article.
2.   A shipment referred to in paragraph 1 may only be arranged by the person who arranges the shipment referred to in Article 3, points (7)(ii), (iii) and (iv), when that person has obtained a permit or is registered in accordance with Chapter IV of Directive 2008/98/EC.
3.   The person who arranges the shipment shall only ship waste to a waste recovery facility which has obtained a permit or registration in accordance with Chapter IV of Directive 2008/98/EC. The facility shall present the permit or proof of registration to the person who arranges the shipment before the shipment occurs.
4.   All undertakings involved in the shipment shall complete the form set out in Annex VII with the relevant information at the points indicated and ensure that the information is made electronically available in accordance with Article 27, including during the transport of waste, to the other persons involved in the shipment, the competent authorities concerned and the authorities involved in inspections.
Where the person who arranges the shipment is not the original waste producer referred to in Article 3, point (7)(i), the person who arranges the shipment shall ensure that the original waste producer or one of the persons indicated in Article 3, point (7)(ii), (iii) or (v), where practicable, also signs the Annex VII document.
5.   The person who arranges the shipment shall complete the form set out in Annex VII with the relevant information to the extent possible, no later than two working days before the shipment starts. However, information on the actual quantity of the waste, the carrier or carriers and, where applicable, the container identification number may be submitted at the latest before the start of the shipment.
6.   Where the information referred to in paragraphs 4 and 5 cannot be made available online during the transport of waste, the person who arranges the shipment and the carrier or carriers shall ensure that the information is available by other means in the transport vehicle, provided that the information is consistent with the information made available electronically in accordance with paragraphs 4 and 5. In such cases, the person who arranges the shipment shall ensure that any changes or additions to the documents during the transport of waste are submitted via a system referred to in Article 27.
7.   Where a shipment is destined for interim recovery, the facility where the interim or non-interim recovery directly following the initial interim recovery is envisaged, and the R-codes of those operations, shall also be indicated in the Annex VII document in addition to the initial interim recovery, as well as, where practicable, the facilities where subsequent interim or non-interim recovery is envisaged and the R-codes of the related recovery operations.
8.   The recovery facility or the laboratory shall, within two working days of receipt of the waste, provide confirmation to the person who arranges the shipment that the waste has been received by completing the relevant information contained in Annex VII. Where the recovery facility or the laboratory has no access to a system as referred to in Article 27, it shall provide the confirmation via the person who arranges the shipment.
9.   The recovery facility shall, as soon as possible and no later than 30 days after completion of the recovery operation, and no later than one year after receipt of the waste, under its responsibility, provide a certificate, that the recovery has been completed by completing the relevant information contained in Annex VII. Where the recovery facility has no access to a system referred to in Article 27, it shall provide the certificate via the person who arranges the shipment.
10.   All shipments of waste referred to in Article 4(4) and (5) shall be subject to the requirement of the conclusion of a contract between the person who arranges the shipment and the consignee for the recovery of the waste. If the consignee is not the operator of the facility, the contract shall also be signed by the operator of the facility.
The contract referred to in the first subparagraph shall be concluded and effective at the latest by the time the Annex VII document is completed in accordance with paragraph 5 and shall remain effective for the duration of the shipment until a certificate is issued in accordance with paragraph 9.
The contract shall be consistent with the corresponding Annex VII documents and at least contain information on the person who arranges the shipment, the consignee and the facility, the identity of the persons representing each party, the description of the waste, the waste identification codes, the quantity of waste covered by the contract, the recovery operation and the period of validity of the contract.
The contract shall include an obligation that where the shipment of waste or its recovery cannot be completed as intended or where it has been effected as an illegal shipment, the person who arranges the shipment or, where that person is not in a position to ensure completion of the shipment of waste or its recovery, the consignee, is to take the waste back or ensure that it is recovered in an alternative way, and, if necessary, that it is stored in the meantime.
11.   The person who arranges the shipment or the consignee shall provide a copy of the contract referred to in paragraph 10 and of any agreement pursuant to Article 4(5) to the authorities involved in inspections at their request.
12.   The information required in Annex VII shall be available for inspection, enforcement, planning and statistical purposes by Member States and the Commission, in accordance with Article 27 and national legislation.
13.   The information referred to in paragraphs 2 to 9 shall be treated as confidential where that is required by Union or national legislation.
14.   Where the waste is shipped between two establishments under the control of the same legal entity, the contract referred to in paragraph 10 may be replaced by a declaration by that legal entity. That declaration shall cover mutatis mutandis the obligations referred to in paragraph 10.
15.   By 21 May 2026, the Commission shall adopt a delegated act in accordance with Article 80 to supplement this Regulation by setting out instructions on how to complete the Annex VII document.
