Article 26
Costs for take-back when a shipment is illegal
1.   Costs arising from the take-back or recovery or disposal in an alternative way of waste from an illegal shipment, including costs for its transport of waste, recovery or disposal, pursuant to Article 25(2) or (3) and, from date on which the competent authority of dispatch becomes aware that a shipment is illegal, storage costs pursuant to Article 25(12), shall be charged to:
(a)
the notifier or a person deemed to be the notifier, as referred to in Article 25(2), point (a); or, if that is impracticable, in accordance with point (c); or, if no notification has been submitted, in accordance with point (b);
(b)
the person deemed to be the notifier, as referred to in Article 25(2), point (b), or other natural or legal persons as appropriate; or, if that is impracticable, in accordance with point (c);
(c)
the competent authority of dispatch.
2.   Costs arising from recovery or disposal pursuant to Article 25(8), including possible transport and storage costs pursuant to Article 25(12), shall be charged to the consignee; or, if that is impracticable, to the competent authority of destination.
3.   Costs arising from recovery or disposal pursuant to Article 25(10), including possible transport and storage costs pursuant to Article 25(12), shall be charged to:
(a)
the notifier or the person deemed to be the notifier in accordance with Article 25(2), point (b), Article 25(6) or Article 25(7), or the consignee, or both, depending upon the decision by the competent authorities concerned; or, if that is impracticable, in accordance with point (b);
(b)
other natural or legal persons as appropriate; or, if that is also impracticable, in accordance with point (c);
(c)
the competent authorities of dispatch and destination.
4.   In cases where a notification has been submitted and the notifier does not fulfil its responsibilities for the costs being charged, the financial guarantee or equivalent insurance referred to in Article 7 shall be used before charging costs in accordance with paragraphs 1, 2 or 3 to someone other than the notifier or the consignee respectively. Where the costs exceed the amount of cover provided by the financial guarantee or equivalent insurance, the costs shall be charged in accordance with paragraphs 1, 2 and 3.
5.   If a shipment of waste referred to in Article 4(4) or (5) is considered to be illegal, this Article shall apply mutatis mutandis to the person who arranges the shipment and to the competent authorities concerned.
6.   This Article shall apply without prejudice to Union and national law concerning liability.
