Article 6
Contract
1.   Shipments of waste for which a notification is required shall be subject to the requirement of the conclusion of a contract between the notifier and the consignee for the recovery or disposal of the waste. If the consignee is not the operator of the facility for the recovery or disposal of the notified waste, the contract shall also be signed by the operator of the facility.
2.   The contract referred to in paragraph 1 shall be concluded and effective at the time of notification and shall remain effective for the duration of the shipment until a certificate is issued in accordance with Article 15(5), Article 16(6), or, where appropriate, Article 15(4).
The contract shall be consistent with the corresponding notification document and the movement document and at least contain information on the notifier, the consignee and the facility, the identity of the persons representing each party, the notification number, the designation and composition of the waste, the waste identification codes, the quantity of waste covered by the contract, the recovery or disposal operation and the period of validity of the contract.
3.   The contract shall include obligations:
(a)
on the notifier to take the waste back or, where applicable, ensure its recovery or disposal in an alternative way, in accordance with Article 22 and Article 25(2) or (3), if the shipment, or the recovery or disposal, has not been completed as intended or if the shipment is an illegal shipment;
(b)
on the consignee to recover or dispose of the waste in accordance with Article 25(8), if the shipment is an illegal shipment;
(c)
on the facility where the waste is recovered or disposed of, to provide, in accordance with Article 16(6), a certificate that the waste has been recovered or disposed of, in accordance with the consents given for that notification, the conditions attached to those consents and this Regulation.
4.   Where the waste is destined for interim recovery or interim disposal, the contract shall include the following additional obligations:
(a)
on the facility to provide, in accordance with Article 15(4), and, where appropriate, Article 15(5), the certificate or certificates from the facility or facilities carrying out the non-interim recovery or non-interim disposal operation or operations, that all waste received in accordance with the consents given for that notification, the conditions attached to those consents and with this Regulation, has been recovered or disposed of, specifying, where possible, the quantity and type of waste covered by each certificate;
(b)
on the consignee to submit, where applicable, a notification to the initial competent authority of the initial country of dispatch in accordance with Article 15(8).
5.   Where the waste is shipped between two establishments under the control of the same legal entity, the contract referred to in paragraph 1 may be replaced by a declaration by that legal entity. That declaration shall cover the obligations referred to in paragraph 3.
