Article 10
Conditions to consent to a shipment
1.   The competent authorities of dispatch, destination and transit may, within the 30-day time limit referred to in Article 9(1), lay down conditions for their consent to a notified shipment. Such conditions shall be duly reasoned and may be based on one or more of the conditions listed in Article 11 or of the grounds listed in Article 12.
2.   The competent authorities of dispatch, destination and transit may also, within the 30-day time limit referred to in Article 9(1), lay down conditions in respect of the transport of waste within their national jurisdiction. Such transport conditions shall not be more stringent than those laid down in respect of the transport of waste occurring wholly within their national jurisdiction and shall take due account of existing agreements, in particular relevant international agreements.
3.   The competent authorities of dispatch, destination and transit may also, within the 30-day time limit referred to in Article 9(1), lay down a condition that their consent is to be considered withdrawn if the financial guarantee or equivalent insurance is not applicable at the latest at the time of completion of the movement document pursuant to Article 16(2), as required by Article 7(3).
4.   Conditions shall be specified in, or annexed to, the notification document by the competent authority that lays them down.
5.   The competent authority of destination may also, within the 30-day time limit referred to in Article 9(1), lay down a condition that the facility which receives the waste shall keep a regular record of inputs, outputs and/or balances for wastes and the related recovery operations or disposal operations as specified in the notification, and for the period of validity of the notification. Such records shall be signed by a person legally responsible for the facility and shall be submitted to the competent authority of destination within one month of completion of the notified recovery operation or disposal operation.
