Article 29
Classification issues
1.   When deciding whether an object or substance resulting from a production process the primary aim of which is not the production of that object or substance shall be considered to be waste, Member States shall apply Article 5 of Directive 2008/98/EC.
When deciding whether waste which has undergone a recycling or other recovery operation is to be considered to have ceased to be waste, Member States shall apply Article 6 of Directive 2008/98/EC.
When deciding whether an object or substance is to be considered as a used good and not as waste, Member States shall ensure that at least the following conditions are fulfilled:
(a)
further use or reuse of the object or substance is certain;
(b)
the object or substance can fulfil its intended function without significant pre-processing;
(c)
where relevant, the object or substance is tested to ensure its full functionality;
(d)
further use is lawful, that is to say that the object or substance fulfils all relevant product, environmental and health protection requirements for the specific use and will not lead to overall adverse environmental or human health impacts;
(e)
the object or substance is properly preserved and protected against damage during transport, loading and unloading.
The provisions in the third subparagraph shall apply without prejudice to Article 23(2) and Annex VI to Directive 2012/19/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council (43) and Article 72(2) and Annex XIV to Regulation (EU) 2023/1542 of the European Parliament and of the Council (44).
2.   If the competent authorities of dispatch and of destination cannot agree on the classification as regards the distinction between waste and non-waste, taking into account the provisions in paragraph 1, and any conditions or decisions taken at Union level or by Member States pursuant to Article 5 or 6 of Directive 2008/98/EC, the object or substance shall be treated as if it were waste for the purpose of the shipment. This shall be without prejudice to the right of the country of destination to deal with the shipped material in accordance with its national legislation, following arrival of the shipped material and where such legislation is in accordance with Union or international law.
3.   The Commission may adopt implementing acts in order to establish detailed criteria for the uniform application of the conditions laid down in paragraph 1, third subparagraph, to specific substances or objects for which the distinction between used goods and waste is of particular importance for the export of waste from the Union.
Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 81(2).
4.   If the competent authorities of dispatch and of destination cannot agree on the classification of waste destined for recovery as being listed in Annex III, Annex IIIA, Annex IIIB or Annex IV, or not listed in any of those Annexes, the shipment of that waste shall be subject to Article 4(2).
5.   If the competent authorities of dispatch and of destination cannot agree on the classification of the waste treatment operation as being recovery or disposal, the provisions of this Regulation regarding disposal shall apply.
6.   In order to facilitate the harmonised classification of waste listed in Annex III, Annex IIIA, Annex IIIB or Annex IV in the Union, the Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 80 to supplement this Regulation by establishing criteria, such as contamination thresholds, on the basis of which certain wastes shall be classified in Annex III, Annex IIIA, Annex IIIB or Annex IV.
7.   If the competent authorities of dispatch and destination cannot agree on the classification of the waste treatment operation as an interim or non-interim operation, the provisions of this Regulation on interim operations shall apply.
