Article 41
List of countries to which exports of non-hazardous waste from the Union for recovery are authorised
1.   The Commission is empowered to adopt a delegated act in accordance with Article 80 to supplement this Regulation by establishing a list of countries to which the OECD Decision does not apply and to which exports of non-hazardous wastes and mixtures of non-hazardous wastes from the Union for recovery are authorised (‘list of countries to which exports are authorised’). That list shall include countries which have submitted a request pursuant to Article 42(1) and have demonstrated compliance with the requirements set out in Article 42(3), based on an assessment carried out by the Commission pursuant to Article 43, and have agreed to comply with Article 42(5).
2.   The list referred to in paragraph 1 shall include the following information:
(a)
the name of the countries to which export of non-hazardous wastes and mixtures of non-hazardous wastes from the Union for recovery is authorised;
(b)
the specific non-hazardous wastes and mixtures of non-hazardous wastes that are authorised for export from the Union to each country referred to in point (a);
(c)
information, such as an internet address, allowing access to a list of facilities which are licensed under the domestic legislation of each country referred to in point (a) to carry out the recovery of the waste and mixtures of wastes referred to in point (b);
(d)
information on the specific control procedure, if any, applying under the domestic legislation of each country referred to in point (a) to the import of the wastes referred to in point (b), including an indication of whether the import of wastes listed in Annex IX of the Basel Convention is subject to the procedure of prior written notification and consent referred to in Article 38.
3.   The list referred to in paragraph 1 shall be adopted by 21 November 2026, unless no country submits a request pursuant to Article 42(1) or no country complies with the requirements set out in Article 42(3) at that time.
By 21 August 2024, the Commission shall contact all countries to which the OECD Decision does not apply, to provide them with the necessary information on the possibility for those countries to be included in the list of countries to which exports are authorised.
In order to be included in the list of countries to which exports are authorised adopted by 21 November 2026, the countries to which the OECD Decision does not apply shall submit their request pursuant to Article 42(1) by 21 February 2025.
4.   The Commission shall regularly, and at least every two years following its establishment, update the list of countries to which exports are authorised, in order to:
(a)
add a country that complies with the requirements set out in Article 42;
(b)
remove a country which ceases to comply with the requirements set out in Article 42;
(c)
update the information referred to in paragraph 2 based on a request received from the country concerned and, if that request concerns the addition of new wastes or mixtures of wastes, provided that the country concerned has demonstrated compliance with the requirements set out in Article 42 with respect to the new wastes or mixtures of wastes in question;
(d)
include or remove any other element relevant to ensure that the list contains accurate and updated information.
5.   After receiving the information and evidence referred to in Article 42(5), the Commission may request additional information from the country concerned to demonstrate that it continues to comply with the requirements set out in Article 42(3).
6.   Where information becomes available which shows in a plausible manner that the requirements set out in Article 42 are no longer fulfilled for a country already included in the list referred to in paragraph 1, the Commission shall invite that country to provide its views on that information, within a maximum period of two months from the invitation, together with relevant supporting evidence demonstrating continued compliance with those requirements. That period may be extended by an additional period of two months where the country concerned makes a reasoned request for such extension.
7.   Where the country concerned does not provide its views and the requested supporting evidence within the time limit referred to in paragraph 6 or where the provided evidence is insufficient to demonstrate continued compliance with the requirements set out in Article 42, the Commission shall remove that country from the list without undue delay.
8.   The Commission may at any time contact a country included in the list referred to in paragraph 1 to obtain information which is relevant to ensure that that country continues to comply with the requirements set out in Article 42.
