Article 73
Reporting
1.   Before the end of each calendar year, each Member State shall submit to the Commission a copy of the report it has drawn up and submitted to the Secretariat of that Convention for the previous calendar year in accordance with Article 13(3) of the Basel Convention.
2.   Before the end of each calendar year, Member States shall also draw up a report for the previous calendar year, based on the additional reporting questionnaire in Annex XI, and submit it to the Commission. Within a month of submission of that report to the Commission, Member States shall make the section of that report relating to Articles 25, 60(1) and 63(1), including Table 7 of Annex XI, publicly available, electronically via the internet, together with any explanation that the Member States consider to be appropriate, and inform the Commission on the related hyperlinks. The Commission shall compile a list of the Member States’ hyperlinks and make it publicly available on its website.
3.   The reports drawn up by Member States in accordance with paragraphs 1 and 2 shall be submitted to the Commission electronically.
4.   The Commission shall review the data reported in accordance with this Article and publish a report with the results of its review.
In addition, the Commission shall address in that report the following elements:
(a)
trends in illegal shipments and best practices to tackle such shipments, taking into account recommendations made by the waste shipment enforcement group referred to in Article 66;
(b)
the efficiency of the procedure of prior written notification and consent laid down in Chapter 1 of Title II, and notably the related timelines, inter alia, by analysing elements such as the number of objections and consents, and the time between the submission of and a decision taken on a notification, based on data stored in the system referred to in Article 27;
(c)
contribution of this Regulation to climate neutrality, achieving circular economy and zero pollution, taking into account the reports and data published by relevant Union’s agencies.
The European Environment Agency shall support the Commission in the task of monitoring the implementation of this Regulation by, where appropriate, drawing up reports providing an analysis of the shipments of specific waste streams, and of their environmental impacts.
The report mentioned in the first subparagraph shall be drawn up for the first time by 31 December 2029 and every three years thereafter.
5.   After 21 May 2029, the Commission shall draw up a report assessing whether the implementation of the provisions contained in Articles 39 to 46 has ensured the environmentally sound management of plastic waste, both in the EU and in countries where such waste has been exported from the Union, as well as no significant adverse effects occurred on the treatment of domestic waste in importing countries. It shall take into consideration information and elements provided by Member States involved in export of plastic waste, by the competent authorities of the countries of import, as well as by economic operators and civil society organisations.
The report shall also provide information on the evolution of the capacity of waste operators in the Union to manage plastic waste generated in the Member States and imported into the Union in an environmentally sound manner.
The report shall also assess if the provisions on the shipments of waste between Member States have contributed to improving the management of plastic waste, especially looking at the classification of plastic waste under entry EU3011.
This report shall be accompanied, if appropriate, by a legislative proposal to amend this Regulation, which could include stricter conditions on the export of plastic waste to third countries, including export prohibitions.
