Article 4
Overall procedural framework
1.   Shipments of all wastes destined for disposal shall be prohibited, except if consent is obtained in accordance with Article 11. In order to obtain consent in accordance with Article 11 for a shipment destined for disposal, the procedure of prior written notification and consent, laid down in Chapter 1, shall apply.
2.   Shipments of the following wastes destined for recovery shall be subject to the procedure of prior written notification and consent, laid down in Chapter 1:
(a)
wastes listed in Annex IV;
(b)
wastes not classified under one single entry in either Annex III, Annex IIIB or Annex IV;
(c)
mixtures of wastes, unless listed in Annex IIIA;
(d)
waste classified as hazardous in the list of waste established pursuant to Article 7 of Directive 2008/98/EC;
(e)
wastes listed in Annex III or Annex IIIB and mixtures of wastes listed in Annex IIIA contaminated by other materials to an extent which:
(i)
increases the risks associated with the wastes sufficiently to render them appropriate for submission to the procedure of prior written notification and consent, when taking into account the list of waste referred to in Article 7 of Directive 2008/98/EC as well as the hazardous properties listed in Annex III to that Directive; or
(ii)
prevents the recovery of the wastes in an environmentally sound manner;
(f)
wastes or mixtures of wastes containing or contaminated with persistent organic pollutants (POPs) within the meaning of Regulation (EU) 2019/1021 in quantities meeting or exceeding a concentration limit indicated in Annex IV to that Regulation, which are not classified as hazardous waste.
3.   Paragraph 2 shall apply to shipments of mixed municipal waste collected from private households, from other waste producers or from both, as well as to mixed municipal waste which has been subject to a waste treatment operation that has not substantially altered its properties, including refuse-derived fuels processed from mixed municipal waste, where such waste is destined for recovery operations. Shipments of such waste destined for disposal shall be prohibited.
4.   Shipments of the following wastes destined for recovery shall be subject to the general information requirements laid down in Article 18, if the quantity of waste shipped exceeds 20 kg:
(a)
wastes listed in Annex III or Annex IIIB;
(b)
mixtures of wastes, provided that the composition of the mixtures does not impair their environmentally sound recovery and provided that such mixtures are listed in Annex IIIA.
5.   By way of derogation from Article 4(1) and (2), shipments of waste explicitly destined for laboratory analysis or experimental treatment trials to assess either the physical or chemical characteristics of the waste or to determine its suitability for recovery or disposal shall be subject to the general information requirements laid down in Article 18 where all of the following conditions are fulfilled:
(a)
the quantity of waste does not exceed the quantity reasonably needed to perform the analysis or trial in each particular case, but not more than 250 kg or any larger quantity agreed on a case-by-case basis by the competent authorities of dispatch and destination and the person who arranges the shipment;
(b)
in the event a quantity higher than 250 kg is requested by the person who arranges the shipment, that person shall provide the information contained in Annex VII, to the extent possible, to the competent authorities of dispatch and destination together with the reasoned explanation why such a larger quantity is needed to perform the analysis or trial.
