Article 79
Amendment to Annexes I to X and XII
1.   The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 80 to amend Annexes IA, IB, IC, II, III, IIIA, IIIB, IV, V, VI and VII in order to take account of changes agreed under the Basel Convention and the OECD Decision.
2.   The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 80 to amend Annex IC, in order to adapt it to the implementation of Article 27, after 21 May 2026.
3.   The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 80 to amend Annex IIIA, in order to, following the submission of a request by a Member State or on its own initiative, include in that Annex mixtures of two or more wastes listed in Annex III, provided that the composition of those mixtures of wastes does not impair their environmentally sound recovery and where it is demonstrated that the mixture of wastes in question will be managed in an environmentally sound manner within the Union, and provide that one or more of the entries in Annex IIIA shall only apply for shipments between Member States where it is demonstrated that the mixture of wastes in question is expected not to be managed in an environmentally sound manner in countries to which the OECD Decision applies.
4.   The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 80 to amend Annex IIIB, in order to, following the submission of a request by a Member State or on its own initiative, include in that Annex non-hazardous wastes not listed in Annex III, Annex IV or Annex V, where it is demonstrated that the waste in question will be managed in an environmentally sound manner within the Union.
5.   The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 80 to amend Annex VIII as regards the form and content of the information referred to in that Annex, based on experience gained during implementation of this Regulation and to update the form and information in that Annex regarding Union legislation and international guidance as regards environmentally sound management on the basis of developments in the relevant international fora or at Union level and to take account of scientific and technical progress.
6.   The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 80 to amend Annex IX, in order to update the lists of Union legislation and international guidance as regards environmentally sound management on the basis of developments at Union level or in the relevant international fora.
7.   The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 80 to amend Annex X as regards the criteria contained in that Annex, based on experiences gained during implementation of this Regulation and to update the information in that Annex regarding Union legislation and international guidance on the basis of developments in the relevant international fora or at Union level as regards environmentally sound management and to take account of scientific and technical progress.
8.   The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 80 to amend Annex XII as regards the information contained in that Annex, based on experience gained during implementation of this Regulation.
