Article 61
Documentation and evidence
1.   Inspections of shipments shall include at least verification of documents, confirmation of the identity of the actors involved in those shipments and, where appropriate, physical checking of the waste.
2.   In order to ascertain that a substance or object being carried by road, rail, air, sea or inland waterway is not waste, the authorities involved in inspections may require the natural or legal person who is in possession of the substance or object concerned, or who arranges the carriage thereof, to submit documentary evidence:
(a)
as to the origin and destination of the substance or object concerned; and
(b)
that it is not waste, including, where appropriate, evidence of functionality.
For the purpose of the first subparagraph, the protection of the substance or object concerned against damage during transportation, loading and unloading, such as adequate packaging and appropriate stacking, shall also be ascertained.
In order to distinguish between used goods and waste, for the purpose of inspection, the conditions laid down in Article 29(1), third subparagraph, shall apply, as well as any criteria established pursuant to Article 29(3), where applicable.
This paragraph shall be without prejudice to the application of Article 23(2) and Annex VI to Directive 2012/19/EU and to the application of Article 72(2) and Annex XIV to Regulation (EU) 2023/1542.
3.   The authorities involved in inspections may conclude that the substance or object concerned is waste where:
(a)
the evidence referred to in paragraph 2 or required under other Union legislation to ascertain that a substance or object is not waste, has not been submitted within the period specified by them; or
(b)
they consider the evidence and information available to them to be insufficient to reach a conclusion, or they consider the protection provided against damage referred to in paragraph 2, the second subparagraph, to be insufficient.
Where the authorities have concluded that a substance or object is waste in accordance with the first subparagraph, the carriage of the substance or object concerned or the shipment of waste concerned shall be considered as an illegal shipment. Consequently, it shall be dealt with in accordance with Articles 25 and 26 and the authorities involved in inspections shall, without delay, inform the competent authority of the country where the inspection concerned took place accordingly.
4.   In order to ascertain whether a shipment of waste complies with this Regulation, the authorities involved in inspections may require the notifier, the person who arranges the shipment, the waste holder, the carrier, the consignee and the facility that receives the waste to submit relevant documentary evidence to them within a period specified by them, and may detain the waste in a shipment and, when necessary, the means of transport containing the waste, as well as suspend the transport of the waste until such documentation has been provided.
5.   In order to ascertain whether a shipment of waste subject to the general information requirements set out in Article 18 is destined for recovery operations which are in accordance with Article 59, the authorities involved in inspections may require the person who arranges the shipment and the consignee to submit relevant documentary evidence provided by the interim and non-interim recovery facility and, if necessary, approved by the competent authority of destination. In cases of export from the Union, the authorities involved in inspections shall require documentary evidence on the audit carried out in accordance with Article 46.
6.   Where the evidence referred to in paragraph 4 or 5 has not been submitted to the authorities involved in inspections within the period specified by them, or they consider the evidence and information available to them to be insufficient to reach a conclusion, the shipment concerned shall be considered as an illegal shipment and shall be dealt with in accordance with Articles 25 and 26. The authorities involved in inspections shall, without delay, inform the competent authority of the country where the inspection concerned took place accordingly.
7.   The Commission is empowered to adopt, by means of implementing acts, a correlation table between the codes of the combined nomenclature, provided for in Regulation (EEC) No 2658/87 and the entries of waste listed in Annex III, Annex IIIA, Annex IIIB, Annex IV, and Annex V to this Regulation. The Commission shall keep these acts updated, in order to reflect changes to that nomenclature and to the entries listed in those Annexes, as well as to include any new waste-related codes of the Harmonised System Nomenclature that the World Customs Organisation may adopt. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 81(2). Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2016/1245 (46) shall remain in force until the empowerment referred to in the present Article is exercised by the Commission.
