Article 8
Requests for information and documentation by the competent authorities concerned
1.   If the notification is considered not to be properly carried out as referred to in Article 5(5), the competent authority of dispatch shall request information and documentation from the notifier in accordance with Article 5(3) and, where applicable, with Article 5(4).
2.   The request for information and documentation referred to in paragraph 1 shall be submitted to the notifier as soon as possible, but no later than 10 working days after submission of the notification.
3.   The notifier shall provide the information and documentation referred to in paragraph 1 as soon as possible, and no later than 10 working days after the request by the competent authority of dispatch. If requested by the notifier, the competent authority of dispatch may extend that deadline by a reasonable time if the notifier provides a reasoned explanation why such an extension is necessary to be able to provide the requested information and documentation.
4.   Where, after the expiry of the deadline referred to in paragraph 3, the competent authority of dispatch still considers that the notification has not been properly carried out as referred to in Article 5(5), or additional information and documentation as referred to in Article 5(4) is still required, it may as soon as possible, and no later than seven working days after the expiry of the deadline referred to in paragraph 3, make up to two more requests for information and documentation from the notifier in accordance with paragraph 2. Paragraph 3 shall apply to any such request mutatis mutandis.
5.   The competent authority of dispatch may decide that the notification is not valid and is not to be further processed, if the information and documentation provided is not sufficient or where no information has been provided by the notifier, within the deadline referred to in paragraph 3, or where a first request pursuant to paragraph 4 was made, within the deadline referred to in that paragraph.
The competent authority of dispatch shall decide that the notification is not valid and is not to be processed further, if the information and documentation provided upon the final request made in accordance with paragraph 4, is not sufficient or where no information has been provided by the notifier, within the deadline referred to in paragraph 4.
The competent authority of dispatch shall inform the notifier and the other competent authorities concerned of its decision pursuant to this paragraph as soon as possible, but no later than seven working days after the expiry of the deadline referred to in paragraph 3, or, where applicable, paragraph 4.
6.   Where the competent authority of dispatch considers that the notification has been properly carried out as referred to in Article 5(5), it shall, as soon as possible, but no later than 10 working days after submission of the properly carried out notification, or within seven working days of the expiry of the deadline referred to in paragraph 3, or, where applicable, paragraph 4, inform the notifier and other competent authorities concerned thereof.
7.   Where the competent authority of destination or any competent authority of transit considers that information and documentation in accordance with Article 5(3) or additional information and documentation as referred to in Article 5(4) is required, it shall, as soon as possible, but no later than 10 working days after receipt of the information as referred to in paragraph 6, request that information and documentation from the notifier and inform the other competent authorities of that request.
8.   The notifier shall provide the information and documentation referred to in paragraph 7, as soon as possible, but no later than 10 working days after the request by the competent authority concerned.
If requested by the notifier, the competent authority concerned may extend the deadline referred to in the first subparagraph by a reasonable time, if the notifier provides a reasoned explanation why that such an extension is necessary to be able to provide the requested information and documentation.
9.   Where the competent authority of destination or any competent authority of transit considers that information and documentation pursuant to Article 5(3) or additional information and documentation pursuant to in Article 5(4) is still required, the competent authority concerned may as soon as possible, but no later than seven working days after the expiry of the deadline referred to in paragraph 8, make up to two more requests for information and documentation from the notifier in accordance with paragraph 7. Paragraph 8 shall apply to any such request mutatis mutandis.
10.   The competent authority of destination or any competent authority of transit may decide that the notification is not valid and is not to be further processed if the information and documentation provided is not sufficient or where no information has been provided by the notifier within the deadline referred to in paragraph 8 or, where a first request pursuant to paragraph 9 was made, within the deadline referred to in that paragraph.
The competent authority of destination or any competent authority of transit shall decide that the notification is not valid and is not processed further if the information and documentation provided upon the final request made in accordance with paragraph 8, is not sufficient or where no information has been provided by the notifier within the deadline referred to in paragraph 8.
The competent authority of destination or any competent authority of transit shall inform the notifier and the other competent authorities concerned of its decision pursuant to this paragraph, as soon as possible, but no later than seven working days after the expiry of the deadline referred to in paragraph 8, or, where applicable, paragraph 9.
11.   The competent authority of destination or any competent authority of transit shall inform the notifier and the other competent authorities concerned that it is satisfied with the properly carried out notification as soon as possible, but no later than three working days after receipt of the information as referred to in paragraph 6 or that it is satisfied with the information and documentation as soon as possible, but no later than three working days after the requested information and documentation have been provided by the notifier pursuant to paragraph 8 and, where relevant, paragraph 9.
12.   Where the notification has been properly completed, as referred to in Article 5(6), taking into account the information referred to in paragraph 11, the competent authority of destination shall immediately inform the notifier and the competent authority of dispatch and any competent authority of transit concerned.
13.   Where, within 30 working days of the day after the submission of the notification or of the information and documentation having been provided in accordance with paragraph 3 or 4 the competent authority of dispatch has not acted in accordance with paragraph 1, 5 or6, it shall provide the notifier with a reasoned explanation upon request.
Where, within 30 working days of the expiry of the deadline referred to in paragraph 7, or of information and documentation having been provided in accordance with paragraph 8 or 9, the competent authority of destination or any competent authority of transit has not acted in accordance with paragraph 7 or paragraph 9, 10, 11 or 12, it shall provide the notifier with a reasoned explanation upon request.
