Article 23
Take-back when a shipment subject to general information requirements cannot be completed as intended
1.   Where a shipment of waste referred to in Article 4(4) or (5), or its recovery, cannot be completed as intended, in accordance with the Annex VII document or the contract referred to in Article 18(10), and where such shipment is not an illegal shipment, the person who has arranged the shipment in accordance with Article 18 shall immediately inform the competent authority of dispatch thereof. In such cases, the person who arranges the shipment or the consignee, following the obligations of the contract referred to in Article 18(10), shall take the waste back to the country of dispatch or ensure its recovery in an alternative way in the country of destination or elsewhere, and ensure, if necessary, that arrangements are made for the safe storage of the waste pending its return or non-interim recovery or non-interim disposal in an alternative way.
The take-back or recovery of the waste in an alternative way shall take place within 90 days, or any other period agreed between the competent authorities concerned, after the date on which the person who arranges the shipment informed the competent authority of dispatch in accordance with the first subparagraph.
2.   In cases of alternative arrangements as referred to in paragraph 1, the person who arranges the shipment or the consignee, as relevant, shall ensure that the waste concerned is managed in an environmentally sound manner and in accordance with Article 59.
3.   In cases of take back or alternative arrangements outside the initial country of destination, as referred to in paragraph 1, relevant information in the Annex VII document shall be completed and submitted by the person who arranged the shipment initially, in accordance with Article 18. Where the shipment for take-back or destined for alternative arrangements is subject to Article 4(1), (2) or (3), Article 22 shall apply mutatis mutandis.
4.   Where the competent authority of dispatch becomes aware that a shipment of waste referred to in Article 4(4) or (5), or its recovery, has not been completed as intended and that the obligations to take the waste back or arrange for its alternative recovery in accordance with paragraph 1 have not been fulfilled, the competent authority of dispatch shall take all necessary measures to ensure that the person that has arranged the shipment takes the waste back or arranges for its recovery in an alternative way and ensures, if necessary, that arrangements are made for the safe storage of the waste pending its return or non-interim recovery or non-interim disposal in an alternative way. Where it is impracticable for the person that has arranged the shipment to fulfil the take-back obligations, those obligations shall be fulfilled by a person deemed to be the person who arranges the shipment in accordance with paragraph 5 or 6, where relevant.
5.   Where the person who arranges the shipment specified in Article 3, point (7)(iv), fails to fulfil any of the take-back obligations set out in this Article or Article 24, the original waste producer, the new waste producer or the collector specified in Article 3, point (7)(i), (ii) or (iii), respectively, who authorised the dealer or broker to act on its behalf shall be deemed to be the person who arranges the shipment for the purpose of those take-back obligations.
6.   Where the person who arranges the shipment specified in Article 3, point (7)(i), (ii) or (iii), fails to fulfil any of the take-back obligations set out in this Article or Article 24, the waste holder specified in Article 3, point (7)(v), shall be deemed to be the person who arranges the shipment for the purpose of those take-back obligations.
7.   Where it is impracticable for the person who arranges the shipment or a person deemed responsible in accordance with paragraph 5 or 6 to fulfil the take-back obligations set out in paragraph 4, the competent authority of dispatch or a natural or legal person on its behalf shall be deemed to be responsible for the obligations under this Article.
