Article 67
General provisions
1.   Without prejudice to Regulation (EC) No 515/97, the Commission shall exercise the powers conferred by Articles 67 to 71 in order to support and complement the enforcement activities of the Member States and to contribute to a uniform implementation of this Regulation throughout the Union.
2.   The Commission may exercise the powers conferred onto it by this Regulation with respect to shipments of waste that fall under the scope of application of this Regulation pursuant to Article 2(1), which are of a complex nature and potentially have serious adverse effects on human health or the environment and where the investigation needed has a cross-border dimension involving at least two countries. The Commission may initiate actions according to these powers on its own initiative, on the request of the authorities of one or more Member States, or on a complaint if there is sufficient suspicion that the carriage of the substance or object concerned or the shipment of waste concerned constitutes an illegal shipment. The Commission may also forward such complaints to the competent authorities of the Member States concerned.
If the Commission decides not to act, it shall reply to the authority of the Member States or the persons who sent the complaint in a reasonable time, stating the reasons why they believe there is no sufficient suspicion, unless there are reasons of public interest, such as protecting the confidentiality of administrative or criminal proceedings, not to do so.
The Commission shall also provide the Member States with assistance in organising close and regular cooperation between their competent authorities pursuant to Article 71.
3.   In exercising its powers, the Commission shall take into account the inspections, prosecuting, legal or administrative proceedings in progress or already carried out in respect of the same shipments by the authorities of a Member State pursuant to this Regulation and shall ensure not to interfere with such proceedings. When exercising its powers, the Commission shall take into account any request of postponement from an authority of a Member State through its permanent staff responsible for cooperation or through the focal points referred to in Article 65(2).
4.   On completion of its actions, the Commission shall draw up a report. If the Commission concludes that the carriage of the substance or object concerned or the shipment of waste concerned constitutes an illegal shipment, it shall inform the competent authorities of the country or countries concerned accordingly and recommend that such an illegal shipment is dealt with in accordance with Articles 25 and 26. The Commission may also recommend certain follow-up to the relevant authorities of the Member States, and, where necessary inform the Union institutions, bodies, offices and agencies concerned.
5.   Reports drawn up on the basis of paragraph 4, together with all evidence in support and annexed thereto, shall constitute admissible evidence:
(a)
in judicial proceedings of a non-criminal nature before national courts and in administrative proceedings in the Member States;
(b)
in criminal proceedings in the Member State where their use proves necessary in the same way and under the same conditions as administrative reports drawn up by national administrative authorities and shall be subject to the same evaluation rules as those applicable to administrative reports drawn up by national administrative authorities and shall have the same evidentiary value as such reports;
(c)
in judicial proceedings before the Court of Justice of the European Union.
The power of the Court of Justice of the European Union and national courts and competent authorities to freely assess the evidential value of the reports drawn up by the Commission in accordance with paragraph 4 shall not be affected by this Regulation.
