Article 43
Assessment of the request for inclusion in the list of countries to which exports are authorised
1.   The Commission shall assess the requests submitted pursuant to Article 42 without delay and, if it is satisfied that the requirements set out in that Article are complied with, it shall include the country making the request in the list of countries to which exports are authorised. The assessment shall be based on the information and supporting evidence provided by the country making the request, as well as other relevant information, and determine if the country making the request complies with the requirements set out in Article 42, including whether it has put in place and implements all necessary measures to ensure that the wastes and mixtures of wastes concerned will be managed in an environmentally sound manner as referred to in Article 59, and that there are no substantial adverse effects on the management of domestic waste in the country concerned as a consequence of the waste exported from the Union. In order to perform this assessment, the Commission shall use, as points of reference, the relevant provisions in the legislation and guidance referred to in Annex IX.
2.   Where, during the course of its assessment, the Commission considers that the information provided by the country making the request is incomplete or insufficient to demonstrate compliance with the requirements set out in Article 42, it shall give that country an opportunity to provide additional information within a maximum period of three months. That period may be extended by an additional period of three months where the requesting country makes a reasoned request for such extension.
3.   Where the country making the request does not provide the additional information within the time limit referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article, or where the provided additional information is still considered to be incomplete or insufficient to demonstrate compliance with the requirements set out in Article 42, the Commission shall inform without undue delay the country making the request that it cannot be included in the list of countries to which exports are authorised and that its request will no longer be processed. In such a case, the Commission shall also inform the country making the request of the reasons for that conclusion. The country making the request may submit a new request pursuant to Article 42.
4.   The Commission shall assess the requests submitted pursuant to Article 42(4) without undue delay and, if it is satisfied that the requirements set out in Article 42(3) and (4) are complied with, it is empowered to adopt a delegated act in accordance with Article 80 to include the country making the request in the list of countries to which exports are authorised. In order to perform this assessment, the Commission shall use, as points of reference, the relevant provisions in the legislation and guidance referred to in Annex IX.
