Article 70
Procedural guarantees
1.   The Commission shall carry out inspections and request information in compliance with the procedural guarantees of the notifier, the person who arranges the shipment, the waste producer, the waste holder, the waste carrier, the consignee or the facility that receives the waste set out in this Article.
2.   The notifier, the person who arranges the shipment, the waste producer, the waste holder, the waste carrier, the consignee or the facility that receives the waste shall have:
(a)
the right not to make self-incriminating statements;
(b)
the right to be assisted by a person of choice;
(c)
the right to use any of the official languages of the Member State where the inspection takes place;
(d)
the right to comment on facts concerning them, once the inspection has been completed and before the adoption of a report pursuant to Article 67(4). The invitation to comment shall include a summary of the facts concerning the person in question and shall indicate an adequate time limit for submitting comments. In duly justified cases where necessary to preserve the confidentiality of the inspection or of an ongoing or future administrative or criminal investigation by a national authority, the Commission may decide to defer the invitation to comment;
(e)
the right to receive a copy of the record of interview and either approve it or add observations;
(f)
where the Commission has made judicial recommendations pursuant to Article 67(4), and without prejudice to the confidentiality rights of whistle-blowers and informants, and in accordance with the applicable confidentiality and data protection rules, the person in question may request the Commission to provide the report drawn up under Article 67(4) to the extent that it relates to that person. The Commission shall grant access only with the explicit consent of all recipients of the report.
The Commission shall seek evidence for and against the notifier, the person who arranges the shipment, the waste producer, the waste holder, the waste carrier, the consignee or the facility that receives the waste, and carry out inspections and request information objectively and impartially and in accordance with the principle of the presumption of innocence.
3.   The Commission shall ensure the confidentiality of the inspections, of the interview and of the request carried out pursuant to this section. Information transmitted or obtained in the course of the inspections, interview and requests pursuant to this section shall be subject to data protection rules.
