Article 53
Procedural requirements for imports from a country to which the OECD Decision applies or from other areas during situations of crisis or during peacemaking or peacekeeping operations
1.   Where waste destined for recovery is imported into the Union from countries and through countries to which the OECD Decision applies, or in cases referred to in Article 52(1), point (e), the provisions of Title II shall apply mutatis mutandis, with the adaptations and additional provisions set out in paragraphs 2 and 3.
2.   The following adaptations shall apply:
(a)
the consent as required in accordance with Article 9 may be provided in the form of tacit consent from the competent authority of dispatch outside the Union;
(b)
shipments of waste destined for experimental treatment trials referred to in Article 4(5) shall be subject to the procedure of prior written notification and consent;
(c)
shipments of waste destined for laboratory analysis referred to in Article 4(5) shall be subject to the procedure of prior written notification and consent, unless the quantity of such waste has been determined based on the minimum quantity reasonably needed to adequately perform the analysis in each particular case, and does not exceed 25 kg, in which case the procedural requirements of Article 18 shall apply;
(d)
the provisions in Article 51(2), points (a) to (e) shall apply;
(e)
the facility mentioned in Articles 15(3) and 16(5) shall provide the respective confirmation within 3 working days of receipt of the waste.
3.   Article 51(3) shall also apply.
4.   The shipment may take place only if all the following conditions are fulfilled:
(a)
the notifier has received written consent from the competent authorities of dispatch, destination and, where appropriate, transit, or tacit consent from the competent authority of dispatch outside the Union has been provided or can be assumed, and the conditions laid down in the respective decisions have been met;
(b)
the conditions specified in Article 51(4), points (b), (c) and (d) have been met.
5.   The provisions in Article 51(5) and (6) shall apply.
