Article 7
Financial guarantee or equivalent insurance
1.   Shipments for which a notification is required shall be subject to the requirement of a financial guarantee or equivalent insurance, covering all of the following:
(a)
costs of transport of waste;
(b)
costs of recovery or disposal, including any necessary interim operation;
(c)
costs of storage for 90 days.
2.   The financial guarantee or equivalent insurance shall cover costs arising in the context of all the following cases:
(a)
where a shipment, or the recovery or disposal, cannot be completed as intended, as referred to in Article 22;
(b)
where a shipment, or the recovery or disposal, is illegal, as referred to in Article 25.
3.   The financial guarantee or equivalent insurance shall be established by the notifier or by another natural or legal person on behalf of the notifier and shall be effective at the time of notification or, if the competent authority which approves the financial guarantee or equivalent insurance so allows, at the latest at the time of completion of the movement document in accordance with Article 16(2). The financial guarantee or equivalent insurance shall apply to the shipment at the latest from when the shipment starts.
4.   The competent authority of dispatch shall approve the financial guarantee or equivalent insurance, including the form, wording and amount of the cover.
5.   The financial guarantee or equivalent insurance shall be valid for and cover the shipment and completion of recovery or disposal.
The financial guarantee or equivalent insurance shall be released when the competent authority that has approved it has received the certificate referred to in Article 16(6) or, where appropriate, the certificate referred to in Article 15(5) as regards interim recovery or interim disposal.
6.   By way of derogation from paragraph 5, where the waste is destined for interim recovery or interim disposal and subsequent recovery or subsequent disposal is carried out in the country of destination, the competent authorities of dispatch and destination may agree that the financial guarantee or equivalent insurance is to be released once the competent authority concerned has received the certificate referred to in Article 15(4). In that case, the competent authority which decides to release the financial guarantee or equivalent insurance shall immediately inform the other competent authorities concerned of its decision, and any subsequent shipment to a recovery or disposal facility shall be covered by a new financial guarantee or equivalent insurance unless the competent authority of destination is satisfied that such a financial guarantee or equivalent insurance is not required. In those circumstances, the competent authority of destination shall be responsible for obligations arising in the case of take-back where the shipment or the subsequent recovery or subsequent disposal cannot be completed as intended, as referred to in Article 22, or in the case of an illegal shipment, as referred to in Article 25.
7.   The competent authority within the Union which has approved the financial guarantee or equivalent insurance shall have access to that guarantee or insurance and shall make use of the funding, including for the purpose of payments to other authorities concerned, in order to meet the obligations arising under Articles 24 and 26.
8.   In the case of a general notification pursuant to Article 13, a financial guarantee or equivalent insurance covering parts of the general notification may be established, instead of one covering the entire general notification. In such cases, the financial guarantee or equivalent insurance shall apply to the parts of the notified shipment which it covers at the latest at the time of completion of the movement document in accordance with Article 16(2).
9.   The financial guarantee or equivalent insurance referred to in paragraph 8 of this Article shall be released when the competent authority that approved it receives the certificate referred to in Article 16(6) or, where relevant, in Article 15(5), as regards interim recovery or interim disposal for the waste. Paragraph 6 of this Article shall apply mutatis mutandis.
10.   The Commission shall assess the feasibility of establishing a simple, risk-based and harmonised calculation method for determining the amount of financial guarantees or equivalent insurances and, if appropriate, adopt an implementing act to establish such a simple, risk-based and harmonised calculation method. That implementing act shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 81(2).
In carrying out the assessment referred to in the first subparagraph the Commission shall take into account, inter alia, the relevant rules of the Member States relating to the calculation of the financial guarantee or equivalent insurance as referred to in this Article.
