Article 15
Additional provisions regarding interim recovery and interim disposal
1.   Where a shipment is destined for interim recovery or interim disposal, all the facilities where subsequent interim or non-interim recovery or subsequent interim or non-interim disposal is envisaged shall also be indicated in the notification document in addition to the initial interim recovery or interim disposal.
2.   The competent authorities of dispatch and destination shall only give their consent to a shipment of waste destined for an interim recovery operation or interim disposal operation if they consider that the conditions in Article 11 are fulfilled or they have no reason to raise an objection, in accordance with Article 12, concerning the shipment or shipments to the facilities carrying out any subsequent interim or non-interim recovery or subsequent interim or non-interim disposal.
3.   Within two working days of the receipt of the waste by the facility which carries out the interim recovery operation or interim disposal operation, that facility shall provide confirmation to the notifier and the competent authorities concerned that the waste has been received. That confirmation shall be supplied in or annexed to the movement document.
4.   As soon as possible, but no later than 30 days after completion of the interim recovery operation or interim disposal operation, and no later than one year, or the shorter period referred to in Article 9(6), after the receipt of the waste, the facility carrying out that operation shall, under its responsibility, provide a certificate to the notifier and the competent authorities concerned that the operation has been completed. That certificate shall be supplied in or annexed to the movement document.
5.   When a recovery or disposal facility which carries out an interim recovery operation or interim disposal operation delivers the waste for any subsequent interim or non-interim recovery operation or subsequent interim or non-interim disposal operation to a facility located in the country of destination, it shall obtain as soon as possible and no later than one year, or the shorter period referred to in Article 9(6), after delivery of the waste a certificate from that facility that the subsequent interim or non-interim recovery and interim or non-interim disposal operation has been completed.
The facility carrying out an interim recovery operation or interim disposal operation as referred to in paragraph 3 shall promptly transmit, the relevant certificates to the notifier and the competent authorities concerned, identifying the shipments to which the certificates pertain.
6.   In order to ensure the consistency of the content of the certificate in the first subparagraph of paragraph 5 throughout the Union, the Commission shall, in good time before adopting the implementing act pursuant to Article 27(5), and at the latest by 21 May 2025, adopt a delegated act supplementing this Article establishing the information to be provided in such a certificate. That delegated act shall be adopted in accordance with Article 80.
7.   Where a delivery as referred to in paragraph 5 of this Article is made to a facility located in the initial country of dispatch or in another Member State and it concerns shipments of waste as referred to in Article 4(1), (2) or (3), a new notification shall be required in accordance with this Regulation.
8.   Where a delivery as referred to in paragraph 5 of this Article is made to a facility in a third country and it concerns shipments as referred to in Article 4(1), (2) or (3), a new notification shall be required in accordance with this Regulation and the provisions concerning the competent authorities concerned shall also apply to the initial competent authority of the initial country of dispatch.
