Article 25
Take-back when a shipment is illegal
1.   Where a competent authority discovers a shipment that it considers to be an illegal shipment, it shall immediately inform the other competent authorities concerned.
2.   Where the responsibility for an illegal shipment can be imputed to the notifier, the competent authority of dispatch shall ensure that the waste is taken back by:
(a)
the notifier or, where relevant, by a person deemed to be the notifier in accordance with paragraph 6 or 7, in order to arrange for its disposal or recovery; or if that is impracticable, in accordance with point (c) of this paragraph; or if no notification has been submitted, in accordance with point (b) of this paragraph;
(b)
a person deemed to be the notifier in accordance with Article 3, point (6), or, where relevant, by a person deemed to be the notifier in accordance with paragraph 6 or 7; in order to arrange for its disposal or recovery; or if that is impracticable, in accordance with point (c) of this paragraph;
(c)
by the competent authority of dispatch itself or by a natural or legal person on its behalf in order to arrange for its disposal or recovery.
3.   The take-back obligation set out in paragraph 2 shall not apply if the competent authorities of dispatch, transit and destination concerned and, where relevant, the notifier or person deemed to be the notifier, agree and are satisfied that the waste can be:
(a)
recovered or disposed of in an alternative way in the country of destination, transit or dispatch by the notifier or, where relevant, by a person deemed to be the notifier in accordance with paragraph 6 or 7, or, if that is impracticable, by competent authority of dispatch itself or by a natural or legal person on its behalf; or, if that is impracticable, in accordance with point (b);
(b)
recovered or disposed of in an alternative way in another country by the notifier or, where relevant, by a person deemed to be the notifier in accordance with paragraph 6 or 7, or, if that is impracticable, by the competent authority of dispatch itself or by a natural or legal person on its behalf if all the competent authorities concerned agree.
In the event of export or import, recovery or disposal in an alternative way as agreed upon pursuant to the first subparagraph shall only take place if the take-back in accordance with paragraph 2 is impracticable.
4.   In the case of recovery or disposal in alternative way as referred to in paragraph 3, the notifier, or, where relevant, the person deemed to be the notifier in accordance with paragraph 6 or 7, or, if that is impracticable, the competent authority of dispatch or the natural or legal person on its behalf, shall ensure that the waste concerned is managed in an environmentally sound manner in accordance with Article 59.
5.   The take-back, recovery or disposal referred to in paragraphs 2 and 3 shall take place within 30 days, or such other period as may be agreed between the competent authorities concerned, following the date on which the competent authority of dispatch becomes aware of, or has been advised by the competent authorities of destination or transit of, the illegal shipment, and informed of the reasons therefor. Such advice may result from information submitted to the competent authorities of destination or transit, inter alia, by other competent authorities.
In the case of take-back as referred to in the paragraph 2, points (a), (b) and (c), a new notification shall be submitted, unless the competent authorities concerned agree that a duly reasoned request by the initial competent authority of dispatch is sufficient.
If a new notification is required, it shall be submitted by the person or authority determined in accordance with paragraph 2.
The competent authorities shall not oppose or object to the return of waste of an illegal shipment. In the case of recovery or disposal in an alternative way as referred to in paragraph 3, carried out outside the country where the illegal shipment has been discovered, a new notification shall be submitted by the person or authority listed in that paragraph and in accordance with the order indicated in therein.
The competent authorities concerned shall cooperate, as necessary, to ensure that the waste is taken back or recovered or disposed of in an alternative way as referred to in paragraphs 2 and 3.
6.   Where a notifier specified in Article 3, point (6)(a)(iv), fails to fulfil any of the take-back obligations set out in this Article or Article 26, the original waste producer, the new waste producer or the collector specified in Article 3, point (6)(a)(i), (ii) or (iii), respectively, who authorised that dealer or broker to act on its behalf shall be deemed to be the notifier for the purposes of those take-back obligations.
7.   Where a notifier specified in Article 3, point (6)(a)(i), (ii) or (iii), fails to fulfil any of the take back obligations set out in this Article or Article 26, the waste holder as specified in Article 3, point (6)(a)(v), shall be deemed to be the notifier for the purposes of those take-back obligations.
8.   Where the responsibility for an illegal shipment can be imputed to the consignee, the competent authority of destination shall ensure that the waste is recovered or disposed of in an environmentally sound manner by:
(a)
the consignee; or, if that is impracticable, in accordance with point (b);
(b)
the competent authority itself or by a natural or legal person on its behalf.
The recovery or disposal referred to in the first subparagraph shall take place within 30 days, or such other period as may be agreed between the competent authorities concerned, following the date on which the competent authority of destination becomes aware of, or has been advised by the competent authorities of dispatch or transit of, the illegal shipment and informed of the reasons therefor. Such advice may result from information submitted to the competent authorities of dispatch and transit, inter alia, by other competent authorities.
The competent authorities concerned shall cooperate, as necessary, in the recovery or disposal of the waste in accordance with this paragraph.
9.   If no new notification is required, a new movement document shall be completed in accordance with Articles 15 or 16 by the person responsible for take-back or, if that is impracticable, by the initial competent authority of dispatch.
Where a new notification is submitted by the initial competent authority of dispatch, which carries out the take-back in accordance with paragraph 2, point (c), a new financial guarantee or equivalent insurance shall not be required.
10.   In cases where responsibility for the illegal shipment cannot be imputed to either the notifier or the consignee, the competent authorities concerned shall cooperate to ensure that the waste is recovered or disposed of.
11.   Where an illegal shipment is discovered after completion of an interim recovery operation or interim disposal operation as referred to in Article 7(6), the obligation of the country of dispatch to take the waste back or arrange for recovery or disposal in an alternative way shall end when the facility has issued the certificate referred to in Article 15(4).
Where a facility issues a certificate of recovery or disposal in such a way that it results in an illegal shipment, with the consequence that the financial guarantee or equivalent insurance is released, paragraph 8 of this Article and Article 26(2) shall apply.
12.   Where the waste from an illegal shipment is discovered within a Member State, the competent authority with jurisdiction over the area where the waste was discovered shall be responsible for ensuring that arrangements are made for the safe storage of the waste pending its return or non-interim recovery or non-interim disposal in an alternative way.
13.   Articles 37, 39 and 40 and any export prohibitions contained in a delegated act as referred to in Article 45(6) shall not apply in cases where illegal shipments are returned to the country of dispatch and that country of dispatch is a country covered by the prohibitions set out in those provisions.
14.   If a shipment of waste referred to in Article 4(4) or (5) is considered to be an illegal shipment, this Article shall apply mutatis mutandis to the person who arranges the shipment and to the competent authorities concerned.
15.   This Article shall apply without prejudice to Union and national law on liability.
