Article 66
Waste shipment enforcement group
1.   An enforcement group shall be established to facilitate and improve cooperation and coordination between the Member States in order to prevent and detect illegal shipments (the ‘waste shipment enforcement group’).
2.   The waste shipment enforcement group shall consist of up to three representatives per Member State, selected from the designated permanent staff responsible for the cooperation referred to in Article 65(2) or from permanent staff of other relevant authorities involved in the enforcement of this Regulation, to be nominated by the Member States, which will inform the Commission. That group shall be co-chaired by the representative or representatives of the Commission and by a representative of a Member State elected by the group.
3.   The waste shipment enforcement group shall be a forum for sharing information relevant for the prevention and detection of illegal shipments, including information and intelligence on general trends relating to illegal shipments of waste, risk-based assessments carried out by the authorities of the Member States, and experience and knowledge on enforcement measures, as well as for exchanging views on best practices and for facilitating cooperation and coordination between relevant authorities. The waste shipment enforcement group may examine any technical question relating to the enforcement of this Regulation raised by the chairpersons, either on their own initiative or at the request of the members of the group or the committee referred to in Article 81.
4.   The waste shipment enforcement group shall meet regularly, at least once a year. In addition to the members referred to in paragraph 2, the chairpersons may invite to the meetings or parts of the meetings, where appropriate, representatives of other relevant institutions, bodies, offices, agencies, networks or other stakeholders.
5.   The Commission shall convey the opinions expressed in the waste shipment enforcement group to the committee referred to in Article 81.
