Article 68
Inspections by the Commission
1.   The Commission may, in accordance with Article 67, carry out inspections of shipments pursuant to Article 60(1) and (2) of this Regulation.
2.   The Commission shall only carry out an inspection where there is sufficient suspicion for an illegal shipment of waste.
3.   The Commission shall prepare and conduct inspections in close cooperation with the relevant authorities of the Member State concerned. Such cooperation shall include the exchange of information and the exchange of views on the planning of the inspections and the steps that will be taken. The Commission shall take into account any inspections, ongoing prosecuting, legal or administrative proceedings by administrative or judicial authorities of a Member State.
The Commission shall give notice 15 days in advance of the object, purpose and legal basis of inspections to the permanent staff responsible for cooperation or the focal points referred to in Article 65(2) in the Member State concerned in whose territory the inspection is to be conducted, so that relevant authorities may provide the requisite assistance. To that end, officials of the relevant authorities of the Member State concerned shall be given opportunity to participate in the inspections. In urgent cases, if it is not possible to respect the 15 days’ notice, the Commission shall give notice at the first useful moment.
In addition, upon request of the relevant authorities of the Member State concerned, the inspections shall be carried out jointly by the Commission and the relevant authorities of that Member State.
4.   The staff and other accompanying persons authorised by the Commission to conduct an inspection shall exercise their powers upon production of a written authorisation specifying the subject matter and purpose of the inspection.
5.   The staff of the Commission that conduct an inspection shall be empowered to:
(a)
have access to any premises, land and means of transport of the notifier, the person who arranges the shipment, the waste producer, the waste holder, the carrier, the consignee or the facility that receives the waste;
(b)
examine any relevant documents related to the subject-matter and purpose of the inspections, irrespective of the medium on which they are stored, and to take or obtain in any form copies of or extracts from such documents;
(c)
ask the notifier, the person who arranges the shipment, the waste producer, the waste holder, the carrier, the consignee or the facility that receives the waste for explanations on facts or documents relating to the subject-matter and purpose of the inspections and to record the answers;
(d)
take and record statements from the notifier, the person who arranges the shipment, the waste producer, the waste holder, the carrier, the consignee or the facility that receives the waste related to the subject-matter and purpose of the inspections;
(e)
physically check the waste and take samples of the waste for laboratory tests, where appropriate.
6.   The notifier, the person who arranges the shipment, the waste producer, the waste holder, the waste carrier, the consignee and the facility that receives the waste shall cooperate with the Commission in the course of its inspections.
7.   The authorities of the Member States involved in inspections on the shipments of waste in whose territory the inspection of the Commission is to be conducted shall, at the request of the Commission, provide the necessary assistance to the staff of the Commission.
8.   The notifier, the person who arranges the shipment, the waste producer, the waste holder, the waste carrier, the consignee and the facility that receives the waste are required to submit themselves to inspections of the Commission.
9.   Where the Commission finds that the notifier, the person who arranges the shipment, the waste producer, the waste holder, the waste carrier, the consignee or the facility that receives the waste opposes an inspection, the relevant authorities of the Member State concerned shall, afford the Commission the necessary assistance, requesting where appropriate the assistance of enforcement authorities, so as to enable the Commission to conduct its inspection. If such an assistance requires authorisation from a judicial authority according to national rules, such authorisation shall be applied for.
