Article 39
Prohibition of exports of hazardous and certain other wastes
1.   Exports from the Union of the following wastes destined for recovery in countries to which the OECD Decision does not apply shall be prohibited:
(a)
wastes listed as hazardous in Part 1 of Annex V to this Regulation;
(b)
wastes listed as hazardous in the list of waste referred to in Article 7 of Directive 2008/98/EC;
(c)
wastes referred to in Article 4(3) and wastes listed in Part 2 of Annex V to this Regulation;
(d)
plastic waste classified under entry B3011;
(e)
wastes listed in Annex III or Annex IIIB and mixtures of wastes listed in Annex IIIA that are contaminated by other materials to an extent which increases the risks associated with the waste sufficiently to render them appropriate for submission to the procedure of prior written notification and consent, when taking into account the hazardous properties in Annex III to Directive 2008/98/EC, or prevents the recovery of the wastes in an environmentally sound manner;
(f)
wastes or mixtures of wastes containing or contaminated with POPs in quantities meeting or exceeding a concentration limit indicated in Annex IV to Regulation (EU) 2019/1021;
(g)
hazardous wastes not classified under one single entry in Annex V to this Regulation or in the list of waste referred to in Article 7 of Directive 2008/98/EC;
(h)
mixtures of hazardous wastes and mixtures of hazardous wastes with non-hazardous waste not classified under one single entry in Annex V to this Regulation or in the list of waste referred to in Article 7 of Directive 2008/98/EC;
(i)
wastes notified by the country of destination as hazardous under Article 3 of the Basel Convention;
(j)
wastes of which the import has been prohibited by the country of destination;
(k)
wastes which the competent authority of dispatch has reason to believe will not be managed in an environmentally sound manner, as referred to in Article 59, in the country of destination concerned.
2.   Paragraph 1 of this Article shall not apply to waste that is subject to a take-back obligation pursuant to Article 22 or 25.
3.   Member States may, in exceptional cases, provide, on the basis of documentary evidence provided by the notifier, that a specific hazardous waste listed in Annex V to this Regulation or in the list of waste referred to in Article 7 of Directive 2008/98/EC is excluded from the export prohibition referred to in paragraph 1, where it does not display any of the properties listed in Annex III to Directive 2008/98/EC, taking into account the criteria and applicable cut-off values and concentration limits for the classification of waste as hazardous as specified in that Annex. Where a hazardous property of a waste has been assessed by a test and by using the concentrations of hazardous substances as indicated in Annex III to Directive 2008/98/EC, the results of the test shall prevail.
4.   The fact that waste is not listed as hazardous in Annex V or in the list of waste as referred to in Article 7 of Directive 2008/98/EC, or that it is listed in Part 1, List B of Annex V, shall not preclude, in exceptional cases, characterisation of such waste as hazardous and therefore subject to the export prohibition if it displays any of the properties listed in Annex III to Directive 2008/98/EC, taking into account the criteria and applicable cut-off values and concentration limits for the classification of waste as hazardous, specified therein. Where a hazardous property of a waste has been assessed by a test and by using the concentrations of hazardous substances as indicated in Annex III to Directive 2008/98/EC, the results of the test shall prevail.
5.   In the cases referred to in paragraphs 3 and 4, the competent authority concerned shall inform the envisaged competent authority of destination prior to taking a decision to consent to planned shipments to that country. Member States shall notify such cases to the Commission before the end of each calendar year. The Commission shall forward that information to all Member States, to the Secretariat of the Basel Convention where the information refers to an entry listed in the Basel Convention and to the OECD Secretariat where the information refers to an entry listed in the OECD Decision. On the basis of the information provided, the Commission may make comments and is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 80 to amend Annex V.
