Article 62
Inspection plans
1.   Member States shall ensure that, in respect of their entire geographical territory, one or more plans are established, either separately or as a clearly defined part of other plans, for inspections to be carried out pursuant to Article 60(1) (‘inspection plan’).
Inspection plans shall be based on a risk assessment covering specific waste streams and sources of illegal shipments, the results of previous inspections and considering, where appropriate, intelligence-based data such as data on investigations by police and customs authorities and analyses of criminal activities as well as reliable information from natural or legal persons on possible illegal shipments, relevant information related to the management of waste being shipped and information showing that a shipment bears similarities with shipments previously identified as illegal shipments. That risk assessment shall in particular take into account the need for conducting verifications of whether natural and legal persons exporting waste from the Union comply with the obligations established in Article 46. That risk assessment shall aim, inter alia, to identify the minimum number and frequency of inspections required, including physical checks on establishments, undertakings, brokers, dealers and shipments of waste or on the related recovery or disposal.
2.   Inspection plans shall include, at least, the following elements:
(a)
the objectives and priorities of the inspections, including a description of how those objectives and priorities have been identified;
(b)
the geographical area covered by the inspection plan;
(c)
information on planned inspections, including on a minimum number of inspections and physical checks to be carried out in each calendar year on establishments, undertakings, brokers, dealers and shipments of waste or on the related recovery or disposal, identified in accordance with the risk assessment referred to in paragraph 1;
(d)
the tasks assigned to each authority involved in inspections;
(e)
arrangements for cooperation between authorities involved in inspections;
(f)
information on the training of inspectors on matters relating to inspections; and
(g)
information on the human, financial and other resources for the implementation of the inspection plan.
3.   An inspection plan shall be reviewed at least every three years and, where appropriate, updated. That review shall evaluate to which extent the objectives and other elements of that inspection plan have been implemented.
4.   Without prejudice to applicable confidentiality requirements, Member States shall notify the Commission of the inspection plans referred to in paragraph 1 and any substantial revisions thereof every three years, and for the first time one year after the date of entry into force of this Regulation.
5.   The Commission shall review the inspection plans notified by the Member States in accordance with paragraph 4 and, if appropriate, draw up reports, based on the review of these plans, on the implementation of this Article. Such reports may include, inter alia, recommendations on priorities of inspections and on enforcement cooperation and coordination between the relevant authorities involved in inspections. Such reports may also be presented, where appropriate, in the meetings of the waste shipment enforcement group established under Article 66 and shall be made available to the European Parliament and to the Council.
