Article 16
Requirements following consent to a shipment
1.   After the competent authorities concerned have given consent to a notified shipment, all undertakings involved shall complete the movement document, or, in the case of a general notification, the movement documents at the points indicated. They shall ensure that the information in the movement document is made electronically available via a system referred to in Article 27, including during the time of transport of waste, to the other natural and legal persons involved in the shipment, the competent authorities concerned and the authorities involved in inspections.
2.   Once the notifier has received written consent from the competent authorities of dispatch, destination and transit, or may assume tacit consent by the competent authority of transit, the notifier shall provide the actual date of shipment and complete the movement document to the extent possible, in accordance with the instructions for completing the notification and movement documents in Annex IA and IB in accordance with Annex IC, and submit it to the competent authorities concerned and to the other natural and legal persons involved in the shipment, at least two working days before the shipment starts. However, information on the actual quantity of the waste, carrier or carriers and, where applicable, container identification number may be submitted at the latest before the start of the shipment.
3.   The notifier shall ensure that, in addition to making the movement document available in accordance with paragraph 1, the notification document containing the consents of and the conditions imposed by the competent authorities concerned is made electronically available, including during the transport of waste, to the competent authorities concerned and to the authorities involved in inspections.
4.   Where the documents referred to in paragraphs 1 and 3 cannot be made available online during the transport of waste, the notifier and the carrier or carriers shall ensure that the documents are available by other means in the transport vehicle. In such cases, the notifier shall ensure that any changes or additions to the documents during the transport of waste are submitted via a system referred to in Article 27.
5.   The facility shall, within two working days of receipt of the waste, provide confirmation to the notifier and the competent authorities concerned that the waste has been received. That confirmation shall be supplied in, or annexed to, the movement document.
6.   The facility carrying out a non-interim recovery operation or non-interim disposal operation shall, as soon as possible and no later than 30 days after completion of that operation, and no later than one year, or the shorter period referred to in Article 9(6), after receipt of the waste, under its responsibility, provide a certificate that the non-interim recovery or non-interim disposal has been completed.
7.   The certificate referred to in paragraph 6, shall be submitted to the notifier and the competent authorities concerned.
