Whereas:
(1)
Council Directive 93/92/EEC of 29 October 1993 on the installation of lighting and light-signalling devices on two or three-wheel motor vehicles (3) has been substantially amended (4). In the interests of clarity and rationality the said Directive should be codified.
(2)
Directive 93/92/EEC is one of the separate Directives of the EC type-approval system provided for in Council Directive 92/61/EEC of 30 June 1992 relating to the type-approval of two or three-wheel motor vehicles as replaced by Directive 2002/24/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 March 2002 relating to the type-approval of two or three-wheel motor vehicles (5), and lays down technical prescriptions concerning the design and construction of two or three-wheel motor vehicles as regards the installation of lighting and light-signalling devices. Those technical prescriptions concern the approximation of the laws of the Member States to allow for the EC type-approval procedure provided for by Directive 2002/24/EC to be applied in respect of each type of vehicle. Consequently, the provisions laid down in Directive 2002/24/EC relating to two or three-wheel motor vehicle systems, components and separate technical units apply to this Directive.
(3)
In each Member State the lighting and light-signalling devices fitted to two or three-wheel vehicles should display certain technical characteristics laid down by mandatory provisions. It is necessary to draw up harmonised requirements concerning the fitting of those devices in order to enable the EC type-approval procedure laid down in Directive 2002/24/EC to be applied for each such vehicle.
(4)
It should be specified that lighting devices type-approved for vehicles in categories M1 and N1, in accordance with the relevant Directives, may also be installed on two or three-wheel motor vehicles. Provision should also be made to permit the optional installation of front fog lamps, rear fog lamps, reversing lamps and hazard warning devices on three-wheel mopeds and light quadricycles.
(5)
In order to facilitate access to the markets of non-Community countries, an equivalence should exist, as far as two-wheel motorcycles are concerned, between the requirements of this Directive and those of Regulation No 53 of the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (6) (UNECE).
(6)
This Directive should be without prejudice to the obligations of the Member States relating to the time limits for transposition into national law and application of the Directives set out in Annex VII, Part B,
HAVE ADOPTED THIS DIRECTIVE:
