Whereas:
(1)
Export Credit Agencies (‘ECAs’) contribute to the development of world trade by supporting export and investments by companies in a manner that complements the provision of private sector finance and insurance. The Union is party to the Arrangement on Officially Supported Export Credits (‘the Arrangement’) of the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (‘OECD’). The Arrangement, as concluded by the Participants thereof, regulates the financial terms and conditions that ECAs may offer in order to foster a level playing field for officially supported export credits.
(2)
By virtue of Council Decision 2001/76/EC of 22 December 2000 replacing the Decision of 4 April 1978 on the application of certain guidelines in the field of officially supported export credits (2) and Council Decision 2001/77/EC of 22 December 2000 on the application of principles of a framework agreement on project finance in the field of officially supported export credits (3), the guidelines contained in the Arrangement and the specific rules for project finance apply in the Union.
(3)
The Arrangement indirectly contributes, through the activity of the ECAs, to free and fair trade and investment by companies which would otherwise have less access to credit facilities provided by the private sector.
(4)
The Member States should comply with the Union's general provisions on external action, such as consolidating democracy, respect for human rights and policy coherence for development, and the fight against climate change, when establishing, developing and implementing their national export credit systems and when carrying out their supervision of officially supported export credit activities.
(5)
The Participants to the Arrangement are involved in a continuous process intended to minimise market distortion and to establish a level playing field in which the premiums charged by the ECAs are risk based and should be adequate to cover long-term operating costs and losses and in accordance with World Trade Organization obligations. In order to achieve this goal, the export credit systems operate in a transparent way and agencies report accordingly to the OECD.
(6)
Well-targeted export credits provided by ECAs can contribute to market access opportunities for Union companies, including for small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs).
(7)
The Participants to the Arrangement and the Member States of the Union agreed to disclose certain information on export credits according to the transparency rules of the OECD and of the Union in order to facilitate a level playing field for the Participants to the Arrangement and Member States.
(8)
The Union applies transparency and reporting measures as set out in Annex I.
(9)
In view of the intensified competitive situation on world markets and in order to avoid competitive disadvantages for Union companies, the Commission, with regard to the negotiating authorisation from the Member States, should support the efforts by the OECD in reaching out to non-Participants to the Arrangement. The Commission should use bilateral and multilateral negotiations in order to establish global standards for officially supported export credits. Global standards in this field are a prerequisite for a level playing field in world trade.
(10)
Although OECD countries are guided by the Arrangement, non-OECD countries are not Participants to the Arrangement and this could lead to a competitive advantage for exporters of the latter countries. Those countries, therefore, are being encouraged to apply the Arrangement in order to ensure a level playing field also at the global level.
(11)
In view of the Union's Better Regulation policy, aimed at simplifying and improving existing regulation, the Commission and Member States, in future reviews of the Arrangement, will focus, where appropriate, on reducing administrative burdens on businesses and national administrations, including ECAs.
(12)
The Participants to the Arrangement decided to amend and rationalise the Arrangement. Changes agreed upon by them cover enhanced user-friendliness, improving consistency among the relevant international obligations and the achievement of greater transparency, in particular with regard to non-Participants to the Arrangement. Moreover, the Participants to the Arrangement also agreed to incorporate in the text of the Arrangement the rules on project finance which were introduced by Decision 2001/77/EC, and the rules for export credits for ships, which were introduced by Council Decision 2002/634/EC (4) amending Decision 2001/76/EC.
(13)
Decision 2001/76/EC, as amended, should be repealed and replaced by this Regulation and the consolidated and revised text of the Arrangement annexed thereto, and Decision 2001/77/EC should be repealed.
(14)
In order to smoothly and promptly incorporate into Union legislation the amendments to the guidelines set out in the Arrangement as agreed upon by the Participants to the Arrangement, the Commission should adopt delegated acts to amend Annex II where this is necessary. Therefore the power to adopt acts in accordance with Article 290 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union should be delegated to the Commission in respect of amendments to the guidelines as agreed upon by the Participants to the Arrangement. It is of particular importance that the Commission carry out appropriate consultations during its preparatory work, including at expert level. The Commission, when preparing and drawing up delegated acts, should ensure a simultaneous, timely and appropriate transmission of relevant documents to the European Parliament and to the Council,
HAVE ADOPTED THIS REGULATION:
