Article 5
Roles and responsibilities of EU CSW-CERTEX
1.   The Commission, in collaboration with the Member States, shall develop, integrate and operate EU CSW-CERTEX.
2.   The Commission shall:
(a)
connect the Union non-customs systems referred to in the Annex with EU CSW-CERTEX by the dates set out in the Annex and enable information to be exchanged on the Union non-customs formalities listed therein;
(b)
provide timely guidance and assistance to Member States when they connect to EU CSW-CERTEX as referred to in paragraphs 4 and 5.
3.   Where the Commission provides training on EU CSW-CERTEX, it shall do so under Regulation (EU) 2021/444 of the European Parliament and of the Council (15).
4.   The Member States, assisted where necessary by the Commission, shall connect the national single window environments for customs with EU CSW-CERTEX by the dates set out in Part A of the Annex and enable information to be exchanged on the Union non-customs formalities listed in Part A thereof.
5.   The Member States, assisted, where necessary, by the Commission, may connect the national single window environments for customs with EU CSW-CERTEX and enable information to be exchanged on the Union non-customs formalities listed in Part B of the Annex.
6.   The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 21 to amend Part A of the Annex, as regards the Union non-customs formalities, their respective Union non-customs systems as laid down in Union legislation other than customs legislation, and the date for the connections referred to in paragraphs 2 and 4 of this Article.
7.   The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 21 to amend Part B of the Annex as regards:
(a)
Union non-customs formalities and their respective voluntary Union non-customs systems laid down in Union legislation other than customs legislation, where the use of EU CSW-CERTEX is provided for in that legislation;
(b)
Union non-customs formalities and systems under Regulation (EU) 2021/821 of the European Parliament and of the Council (16) and Council Regulations (EC) No 2173/2005 (17) and (EC) No 338/97 (18); and
(c)
the date for the connection referred to in paragraph 2, point (a), of this Article for the Union non-customs systems referred to in points (a) and (b) of this paragraph.
