Article 6
Treatment
1. Member States shall ensure that producers or third parties acting on their behalf, in accordance with Community legislation, set up systems to provide for the treatment of WEEE using best available treatment, recovery and recycling techniques. The systems may be set up by producers individually and/or collectively. To ensure compliance with Article 4 of Directive 75/442/EEC, the treatment shall, as a minimum, include the removal of all fluids and a selective treatment in accordance with Annex II to this Directive.
Other treatment technologies ensuring at least the same level of protection for human health and the environment may be introduced in Annex II under the procedure referred to in Article 14(2).
For the purposes of environmental protection, Member States may set up minimum quality standards for the treatment of collected WEEE. Member States which opt for such quality standards shall inform the Commission thereof, which shall publish these standards.
2. Member States shall ensure that any establishment or undertaking carrying out treatment operations obtains a permit from the competent authorities, in compliance with Articles 9 and 10 of Directive 75/442/EEC.
The derogation from the permit requirement referred to in Article 11(1)(b) of Directive 75/442/EEC may apply to recovery operations concerning WEEE if an inspection is carried out by the competent authorities before the registration in order to ensure compliance with Article 4 of Directive 75/442/EEC.
The inspection shall verify:
(a) the type and quantities of waste to be treated;
(b) the general technical requirements to be complied with;
(c) the safety precautions to be taken.
The inspection shall be carried out at least once a year and the results shall be communicated by the Member States to the Commission.
3. Member States shall ensure that any establishment or undertaking carrying out treatment operations stores and treats WEEE in compliance with the technical requirements set out in Annex III.
4. Member States shall ensure that the permit or the registration referred to in paragraph 2 includes all conditions necessary for compliance with the requirements of paragraphs 1 and 3 and for the achievement of the recovery targets set out in Article 7.
5. The treatment operation may also be undertaken outside the respective Member State or the Community provided that the shipment of WEEE is in compliance with Council Regulation (EEC) No 259/93 of 1 February 1993 on the supervision and control of shipments of waste within, into and out of the European Community(15).
WEEE exported out of the Community in line with Council Regulation (EEC) No 259/93, Council Regulation (EC) No 1420/1999(16) of 29 April 1999 establishing common rules and procedures to apply to shipments to certain non-OECD countries of certain types of waste and Commission Regulation (EC) No 1547/1999(17) of 12 July 1999 determining the control procedures under Council Regulation (EEC) No 259/93 to apply to shipments of certain types of waste to certain countries to which OECD Decision C(92)39 final does not apply, shall only count for the fulfilment of obligations and targets of Article 7(1) and (2) of this Directive if the exporter can prove that the recovery, reuse and/or recycling operation took place under conditions that are equivalent to the requirements of this Directive.
6. Member States shall encourage establishments or undertakings which carry out treatment operations to introduce certified environmental management systems in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 761/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 19 March 2001 allowing voluntary participation by organisations in a Community eco-management and audit scheme (EMAS)(18).

