Article 7
Register of European political parties and foundations
1.   The Authority shall establish and manage a Register of European political parties and European political foundations. Information from the Register shall be available online in accordance with Article 32.
2.   In order to ensure the proper functioning of the Register, the Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 36 and within the scope of the relevant provisions of this Regulation concerning:
(a)
the information and supporting documents held by the Authority for which the Register is to be the competent repository, which shall include the statutes of a European political party or European political foundation, any other documents submitted as part of an application for registration in accordance with Article 8(2), any documents received from the Member State of the seat as referred to in Article 15(2), and information on the identity of the persons who are members of bodies or hold offices that are vested with powers of administrative, financial and legal representation, as referred to in point (f) of Article 4(1) and point (g) of Article 5(1);
(b)
materials from the Register as referred to in point (a) of this paragraph for which the Register is to be competent to certify legality as established by the Authority pursuant to its competences under this Regulation. The Authority shall not be competent to verify compliance by a European political party or European political foundation with any obligation or requirement imposed on the party or foundation in question by the Member State of the seat pursuant to Articles 4, 5 and Article 14(2) which is additional to the obligations and requirements laid down by this Regulation.
3.   The Commission shall by implementing acts specify the details of the registration number system to be applied for the Register and standard extracts from the Register to be made available to third parties upon request, including the content of letters and documents. Such extracts shall not include personal data other than the identity of the persons who are members of bodies or hold offices that are vested with powers of administrative, financial and legal representation, as referred to in point (f) of Article 4(1) and point (g) of Article 5(1). Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 37.
