Article 20
Donations and contributions
1.   European political parties and European political foundations may accept donations from natural or legal persons of up to a value of EUR 18 000 per year and per donor.
2.   European political parties and European political foundations shall, at the time of the submission of their annual financial statements in accordance with Article 23, also transmit a list of all donors with their corresponding donations, indicating both the nature and the value of the individual donations. This paragraph shall also apply to contributions made by member parties of European political parties and member organisations of European political foundations.
For donations from natural persons the value of which exceeds EUR 1 500 and is below or equal to EUR 3 000, the European political party or European political foundation concerned shall indicate whether the corresponding donors have given their prior written consent to publication in accordance with point (e) of Article 32(1).
3.   Donations received by European political parties and European political foundations within six months prior to elections to the European Parliament shall be reported on a weekly basis to the Authority in writing and in accordance with paragraph 2.
4.   Single donations the value of which exceeds EUR 12 000 that have been accepted by European political parties and European political foundations shall be immediately reported to the Authority in writing and in accordance with paragraph 2.
5.   European political parties and European political foundations shall not accept any of the following:
(a)
anonymous donations or contributions;
(b)
donations from the budgets of political groups in the European Parliament;
(c)
donations from any public authority from a Member State or a third country, or from any undertaking over which such a public authority may exercise, directly or indirectly, a dominant influence by virtue of its ownership of it, its financial participation therein, or the rules which govern it; or
(d)
donations from any private entities based in a third country or from individuals from a third country who are not entitled to vote in elections to the European Parliament.
6.   Any donation that is not permitted under this Regulation shall within 30 days following the date of its receipt by a European political party or a European political foundation:
(a)
be returned to the donor or to any person acting on the donor's behalf; or
(b)
where it is not possible to return it, be reported to the Authority and the European Parliament. The Authorising Officer of the European Parliament shall establish the amount receivable and authorise the recovery in accordance with the provisions laid down in Articles 78 and 79 of the Financial Regulation. The funds shall be entered as general revenue in the European Parliament section of the general budget of the European Union.
7.   Contributions to a European political party from its members shall be permitted. The value of such contributions shall not exceed 40 % of the annual budget of that European political party.
8.   Contributions to a European political foundation from its members, and from the European political party with which it is affiliated, shall be permitted. The value of such contributions shall not exceed 40 % of the annual budget of that European political foundation and may not derive from funds received by a European political party pursuant to this Regulation from the general budget of the European Union.
The burden of proof shall rest with the European political party concerned, which shall clearly indicate in its accounts the origin of funds used to finance its affiliated European political foundation.
9.   Without prejudice to paragraphs 7 and 8, European political parties and European political foundations may accept from citizens who are their members contributions up to a value of EUR 18 000 per year and per member, where such contributions are made by the member concerned on his or her own behalf.
The ceiling laid down in the first subparagraph shall not apply where the member concerned is also an elected member of the European Parliament, of a national parliament or of a regional parliament or regional assembly.
10.   Any contribution that is not permitted under this Regulation shall be returned in accordance with paragraph 6.
