Article 10
Verification of compliance with registration conditions and requirements
1.   Without prejudice to the procedure laid down in paragraph 3, the Authority shall regularly verify that the conditions for registration laid down in Article 3, and the governance provisions set out in points (a), (b) and (d) to (f) of Article 4(1) and points (a) to (e) and (g) of Article 5(1), continue to be complied with by registered European political parties and European political foundations.
2.   If the Authority finds that any of the conditions for registration or governance provisions referred to in paragraph 1, with the exception of the conditions in point (c) of Article 3(1) and point (c) of Article 3(2), are no longer complied with, it shall notify the European political party or foundation concerned.
3.   The European Parliament, the Council or the Commission may lodge with the Authority a request for verification of compliance by a specific European political party or European political foundation with the conditions laid down in point (c) of Article 3(1) and point (c) of Article 3(2). In such cases, and in the cases referred to in point (a) of Article 16(3), the Authority shall ask the committee of independent eminent persons established by Article 11 for an opinion on the subject. The committee shall give its opinion within two months.
Where the Authority becomes aware of facts which may give rise to doubts concerning compliance by a specific European political party or European political foundation with the conditions laid down in point (c) of Article 3(1) and point (c) of Article 3(2), it shall inform the European Parliament, the Council and the Commission with a view to allowing any of them to lodge a request for verification as referred to in the first subparagraph. Without prejudice to the first subparagraph, the European Parliament, the Council and the Commission shall indicate their intention within two months of receiving that information.
The procedures laid down in the first and second subparagraphs shall not be initiated within a period of two months prior to elections to the European Parliament.
Having regard to the committee's opinion, the Authority shall decide whether to de-register the European political party or European political foundation concerned. The decision of the Authority shall be duly reasoned.
A decision of the Authority to de-register on grounds of non-compliance with the conditions set out in point (c) of Article 3(1) or point (c) of Article 3(2) may only be adopted in the event of manifest and serious breach of those conditions. It shall be subject to the procedure set out in paragraph 4.
4.   A decision of the Authority to de-register a European political party or foundation on the ground of a manifest and serious breach as regards compliance with the conditions set out in point (c) of Article 3(1) or point (c) of Article 3(2) shall be communicated to the European Parliament and the Council. The decision shall enter into force only if no objection is expressed by the European Parliament and the Council within a period of three months of the communication of the decision to the European Parliament and the Council or if, before the expiry of that period, the European Parliament and the Council have both informed the Authority that they will not object. In the event of an objection by the European Parliament and by the Council, the European political party or foundation shall remain registered.
The European Parliament and the Council may object to the decision only on grounds related to the assessment of compliance with the conditions for registration set out in point (c) of Article 3(1) and point (c) of Article 3(2).
The European political party or European political foundation concerned shall be informed that objections have been raised to the decision of the Authority to de-register it.
The European Parliament and the Council shall adopt a position in accordance with their respective decision-making rules as established in conformity with the Treaties. Any objection shall be duly reasoned and shall be made public.
5.   A decision of the Authority to de-register a European political party or a European political foundation, to which no objections have been raised under the procedure laid down in paragraph 4, shall be published in the Official Journal of the European Union, together with the detailed grounds for de-registration, and shall enter into force three months following the date of such publication.
6.   A European political foundation shall automatically forfeit its status as such if the European political party with which it is affiliated is removed from the Register.
