Article 9
Examination of the application and decision of the Authority
1.   The application shall be examined by the Authority in order to determine whether the applicant satisfies the conditions for registration laid down in Article 3 and whether the statutes contain the provisions required by Articles 4 and 5.
2.   The Authority shall adopt a decision to register the applicant, unless it establishes that the applicant does not satisfy the conditions for registration laid down in Article 3 or that the statutes do not contain the provisions required by Articles 4 and 5.
The Authority shall publish its decision to register the applicant within one month following receipt of the application for registration or, where the procedures set out in Article 15(4) are applicable, within four months following receipt of the application for registration.
Where an application is incomplete, the Authority shall ask the applicant without delay to submit any additional information required. For the purposes of the deadline laid down in the second subparagraph, time shall only start to run from the date of receipt by the Authority of a complete application.
3.   The standard formal declaration referred to in point (a) of Article 8(2) shall be considered sufficient for the Authority to ascertain that the applicant complies with the conditions specified in point (c) of Article 3(1) or point (c) of Article 3(2), whichever is applicable.
4.   A decision of the Authority to register an applicant shall be published in the Official Journal of the European Union, together with the statutes of the party or foundation concerned. A decision not to register an applicant shall be published in the Official Journal of the European Union, together with the detailed grounds for rejection.
5.   Any amendments to the documents or statutes submitted as part of the application for registration in accordance with Article 8(2) shall be notified to the Authority, which shall update the registration in accordance with the procedures set out in Article 15(2) and (4), mutatis mutandis.
6.   The updated list of member parties of a European political party, annexed to the party statutes in accordance with Article 4(2), shall be sent to the Authority each year. Any changes following which the European political party might no longer satisfy the condition laid down in point (b) of Article 3(1) shall be communicated to the Authority within four weeks of any such change.
