Article 16
Termination of European legal personality
1.   A European political party or a European political foundation shall lose its European legal personality upon the entry into force of a decision of the Authority to remove it from the Register as published in the Official Journal of the European Union. The decision shall enter into force three months after such publication unless the European political party or the European political foundation concerned requests a shorter period.
2.   A European political party or a European political foundation shall be removed from the Register by a decision of the Authority:
(a)
as a consequence of a decision adopted pursuant to Article 10(2) to (5);
(b)
in the circumstances provided for in Article 10(6);
(c)
at the request of the European political party or European political foundation concerned; or
(d)
in the cases referred to in point (b) of the first subparagraph of paragraph 3 of this Article.
3.   If a European political party or a European political foundation has seriously failed to fulfil relevant obligations under national law applicable by virtue of the first subparagraph of Article 14(2), the Member State of the seat may address to the Authority a duly reasoned request for de-registration which must identify precisely and exhaustively the illegal actions and the specific national requirements that have not been complied with. In such cases, the Authority shall:
(a)
for matters relating exclusively or predominantly to elements affecting respect for the values on which the Union is founded, as expressed in Article 2 TEU, initiate a verification procedure in accordance with Article 10(3). Article 10(4), (5) and (6) shall also apply;
(b)
for any other matter, and when the reasoned request of the Member State concerned confirms that all national remedies have been exhausted, decide to remove the European political party or European political foundation concerned from the Register.
If a European political party or a European political foundation has seriously failed to fulfil relevant obligations under national law applicable by virtue of the second subparagraph of Article 14(2), and if the matter relates exclusively or predominantly to elements affecting respect of the values on which the Union is founded, as expressed in Article 2 TEU, the Member State concerned may address a request to the Authority in accordance with the provisions of the first subparagraph of this paragraph. The Authority shall proceed in accordance with point (a) of the first subparagraph of this paragraph.
In all cases, the Authority shall act without undue delay. The Authority shall inform the Member State concerned and the European political party or European political foundation concerned of the follow-up given to the reasoned request for de-registration.
4.   The Authority shall fix the date of the publication referred to in paragraph 1 after consultation with the Member State in which the European political party or European political foundation has its seat.
5.   If the European political party or European political foundation concerned acquires legal personality under the law of the Member State of its seat, such acquisition shall be regarded by that Member State as a conversion of the European legal personality into a national legal personality that fully maintains the pre-existing rights and obligations of the former European legal entity. The Member State in question shall not apply prohibitive conditions in the context of such conversion.
6.   If the European political party or European political foundation does not acquire legal personality under the law of the Member State of its seat, it shall be wound up in accordance with the applicable law of that Member State. The Member State concerned may require that such winding-up be preceded by the acquisition by the party or foundation concerned of national legal personality in accordance with paragraph 5.
7.   In all situations referred to in paragraphs 5 and 6, the Member State concerned shall ensure that the not-for-profit condition laid down in Article 3 is fully respected. The Authority and the Authorising Officer of the European Parliament may agree with the Member State concerned the modalities for termination of the European legal personality, in particular in order to ensure the recovery of any funds received from the general budget of the European Union and the payment of any financial sanctions imposed in accordance with Article 27.
