Article 24
General rules on control
1.   Control of compliance by European political parties and European political foundations with their obligations under this Regulation shall be exercised, in cooperation, by the Authority, by the Authorising Officer of the European Parliament and by the competent Member States.
2.   The Authority shall control compliance by European political parties and European political foundations with their obligations under this Regulation, in particular in relation to Article 3, points (a), (b), and (d) to (f) of Article 4(1), points (a) to (e) and (g) of Article 5(1), Article 9(5) and (6), and Articles 20, 21 and 22.
The Authorising Officer of the European Parliament shall control compliance by European political parties and European political foundations with the obligations relating to Union funding under this Regulation in accordance with the Financial Regulation. In carrying out such controls, the European Parliament shall take the necessary measures in the fields of the prevention of and the fight against fraud affecting the financial interests of the Union.
3.   The control by the Authority and by the Authorising Officer of the European Parliament referred to in paragraph 2 shall not extend to compliance by European political parties and European political foundations with their obligations under applicable national law as referred to in Article 14.
4.   European political parties and European political foundations shall provide any information requested by the Authority, the Authorising Officer of the European Parliament, the Court of Auditors, the European Anti-Fraud Office (OLAF) or Member States which is necessary for the purpose of carrying out the controls for which they are responsible under this Regulation.
Upon request and for the purpose of controlling compliance with Article 20, European political parties and European political foundations shall provide the Authority with information concerning contributions made by individual members and the identity of such members. Moreover, where appropriate, the Authority may require European political parties to provide signed confirmatory statements from members holding elected mandates for the purpose of controlling compliance with the condition laid down in the first subparagraph of point (b) of Article 3(1).
