Article 8
General assembly of members of the collective management organisation
1.   Member States shall ensure that the general assembly of members is organised in accordance with the rules laid down in paragraphs 2 to 10.
2.   A general assembly of members shall be convened at least once a year.
3.   The general assembly of members shall decide on any amendments to the statute and to the membership terms of the collective management organisation, where those terms are not regulated by the statute.
4.   The general assembly of members shall decide on the appointment or dismissal of the directors, review their general performance and approve their remuneration and other benefits such as monetary and non-monetary benefits, pension awards and entitlements, rights to other awards and rights to severance pay.
In a collective management organisation with a dual board system, the general assembly of members shall not decide on the appointment or dismissal of members of the management board or approve their remuneration and other benefits where the power to take such decisions is delegated to the supervisory board.
5.   In accordance with the provisions laid down in Chapter 2 of Title II, the general assembly of members shall decide at least on the following issues:
(a)
the general policy on the distribution of amounts due to rightholders;
(b)
the general policy on the use of non-distributable amounts;
(c)
the general investment policy with regard to rights revenue and to any income arising from the investment of rights revenue;
(d)
the general policy on deductions from rights revenue and from any income arising from the investment of rights revenue;
(e)
the use of non-distributable amounts;
(f)
the risk management policy;
(g)
the approval of any acquisition, sale or hypothecation of immovable property;
(h)
the approval of mergers and alliances, the setting-up of subsidiaries, and the acquisition of other entities or shares or rights in other entities;
(i)
the approval of taking out loans, granting loans or providing security for loans.
6.   The general assembly of members may delegate the powers listed in points (f), (g), (h) and (i) of paragraph 5, by a resolution or by a provision in the statute, to the body exercising the supervisory function.
7.   For the purposes of points (a) to (d) of paragraph 5, Member States may require the general assembly of members to determine more detailed conditions for the use of the rights revenue and the income arising from the investment of rights revenue.
8.   The general assembly of members shall control the activities of the collective management organisation by, at least, deciding on the appointment and removal of the auditor and approving the annual transparency report referred to in Article 22.
Member States may allow alternative systems or modalities for the appointment and removal of the auditor, provided that those systems or modalities are designed to ensure the independence of the auditor from the persons who manage the business of the collective management organisation.
9.   All members of the collective management organisation shall have the right to participate in, and the right to vote at, the general assembly of members. However, Member States may allow for restrictions on the right of the members of the collective management organisation to participate in, and to exercise voting rights at, the general assembly of members, on the basis of one or both of the following criteria:
(a)
duration of membership;
(b)
amounts received or due to a member,
provided that such criteria are determined and applied in a manner that is fair and proportionate.
The criteria laid down in points (a) and (b) of the first subparagraph shall be included in the statute or the membership terms of the collective management organisation and shall be made publicly available in accordance with Articles 19 and 21.
10.   Every member of a collective management organisation shall have the right to appoint any other person or entity as a proxy holder to participate in, and vote at, the general assembly of members on his behalf, provided that such appointment does not result in a conflict of interest which might occur, for example, where the appointing member and the proxy holder belong to different categories of rightholders within the collective management organisation.
However, Member States may provide for restrictions concerning the appointment of proxy holders and the exercise of the voting rights of the members they represent if such restrictions do not prejudice the appropriate and effective participation of members in the decision-making process of a collective management organisation.
Each proxy shall be valid for a single general assembly of members. The proxy holder shall enjoy the same rights in the general assembly of members as those to which the appointing member would be entitled. The proxy holder shall cast votes in accordance with the instructions issued by the appointing member.
11.   Member States may decide that the powers of the general assembly of members may be exercised by an assembly of delegates elected at least every four years by the members of the collective management organisation, provided that:
(a)
appropriate and effective participation of members in the collective management organisation’s decision-making process is ensured; and
(b)
the representation of the different categories of members in the assembly of delegates is fair and balanced.
The rules laid down in paragraphs 2 to 10 shall apply to the assembly of delegates mutatis mutandis.
12.   Member States may decide that where a collective management organisation, by reason of its legal form, does not have a general assembly of members, the powers of that assembly are to be exercised by the body exercising the supervisory function. The rules laid down in paragraphs 2 to 5, 7 and 8 shall apply mutatis mutandis to such body exercising the supervisory function.
13.   Member States may decide that where a collective management organisation has members who are entities representing rightholders, all or some of the powers of the general assembly of members are to be exercised by an assembly of those rightholders. The rules laid down in paragraphs 2 to 10 shall apply mutatis mutandis to the assembly of rightholders.
