Article 14
Implementation and forms of Union funding
1.   The Programme shall be implemented under direct management, in accordance with the Financial Regulation, or under indirect management by entrusting certain implementation tasks to the bodies referred to in point (c) of the first subparagraph of Article 62(1) of the Financial Regulation, in accordance with Articles 4 to 8 of this Regulation. Bodies entrusted with the implementation of the Programme may depart from the rules on participation and dissemination laid down in this Regulation only where such departure is provided for in the legal act that establishes those bodies or entrusts budget implementation tasks to them or, for the bodies referred to in point (c)(ii), (iii) or (v) of the first subparagraph of Article 62(1) of the Financial Regulation, where such departure is provided for in the contribution agreement and the specific operating needs of such bodies or the nature of the action so require.
2.   The Programme may provide funding in any of the forms laid down in the Financial Regulation, including in particular through procurement as a primary form, or grants and prizes.
Where the achievement of the objective of an action requires the procurement of innovative goods and services, grants may be awarded only to beneficiaries that are contracting authorities or contracting entities as defined in Directives 2014/24/EU (27) and 2014/25/EU (28) of the European Parliament and of the Council.
Where the supply of innovative goods or services that are not yet available on a large-scale commercial basis is necessary to achieve the objectives of an action, the contracting authority or the contracting entity may authorise the award of multiple contracts within the same procurement procedure.
For duly justified reasons of public security, the contracting authority or the contracting entity may require that the place of performance of the contract be situated within the territory of the Union.
The Programme may also provide financing in the form of financial instruments within blending operations.
3.   Contributions to a mutual insurance mechanism may cover the risk associated with the recovery of funds due by recipients and shall be considered to be a sufficient guarantee under the Financial Regulation. Article 37 of Regulation (EU) 2021/695 shall apply.
