Article 12
Security
1.   Actions carried out under the Programme shall comply with applicable security rules, including with Union and national law and in particular in relation to the protection of the classified information against unauthorised disclosure. In the case of actions carried out outside the Union using or generating classified information, in addition to compliance with above requirements such actions shall be subject to a security agreement concluded between the Union and the third country in which the activity is conducted.
2.   Where appropriate, proposals and tenders to be submitted by applicants shall include a security self-assessment that identifies any security issues and details how those issues are to be addressed in order to comply with Union and national law.
3.   Where appropriate, the Commission or the body entrusted with the implementation of the Programme shall carry out a security review of proposals for funding submitted by applicants that raise security issues.
4.   Where appropriate, the actions carried out under the Programme shall comply with Commission Decision (EU, Euratom) 2015/444 (26) and the rules implementing that Decision.
5.   The work programme may also provide that legal entities established in associated countries and legal entities that are established in the Union but are controlled from third countries are not eligible to participate in all or some actions under Specific Objective 3 for duly justified security reasons. In such cases, calls for proposals and calls for tenders shall be restricted to legal entities established or deemed to be established in Member States and controlled by Member States or by nationals of Member States.
6.   If duly justified for security reasons, the work programme may also provide that legal entities established in associated countries and legal entities that are established in the Union but are controlled from third countries may be eligible to participate in all or some actions under Specific Objectives 1 and 2 only if they comply with the requirements to be fulfilled by those legal entities to guarantee the protection of the essential security interests of the Union and the Member States and to ensure the protection of classified documents information. Those requirements shall be set out in the work programme.
7.   Where appropriate, the Commission or the body entrusted with the implementation of the Programme shall carry out security checks. Funding for actions which do not comply with the security requirements referred to in this Article may be suspended, terminated or reduced at any time, in accordance with the Financial Regulation.
