Article 5
Scope of support from the ERDF
1.   The ERDF shall support the following:
(a)
investments in infrastructure;
(b)
activities for applied research and innovation, including industrial research, experimental development and feasibility studies;
(c)
investments in access to services;
(d)
productive investments in SMEs and investments aiming at safeguarding existing jobs and creating new jobs;
(e)
equipment, software and intangible assets;
(f)
networking, cooperation, exchange of experience and activities involving innovation clusters including between businesses, research organisations and public authorities;
(g)
information, communication and studies; and
(h)
technical assistance.
2.   Productive investments in enterprises other than SMEs may be supported:
(a)
when they involve cooperation with SMEs in research and innovation activities supported under point (a)(i) of the first subparagraph of Article 3(1);
(b)
when primarily supporting energy efficiency measures and renewable energy under points (b)(i) and (b)(ii) of the first subparagraph of Article 3(1);
(c)
when they are made in small mid-cap and mid-cap companies as defined in points (6) and (7) of Article 2 of Regulation (EU) 2015/1017 of the European Parliament and the Council (21) through financial instruments; or
(d)
when they are made in small mid-cap companies in research and innovation activities supported under point (a)(i) of the first subparagraph of Article 3(1).
3.   In order to contribute to the specific objective under PO 1 set out in point (a)(iv) of the first subparagraph of Article 3(1), the ERDF shall also support training, life-long learning, reskilling and education activities.
4.   In order to contribute to the specific objective under PO 2 set out in point (b)(iv) of the first subparagraph of Article 3(1) and to the specific objective under PO 4 set out in point (d)(v) of that subparagraph, the ERDF shall also support the purchase of supplies necessary for strengthening the resilience of health systems and for strengthening disaster resilience.
5.   Under Interreg, the ERDF may also support:
(a)
sharing of facilities and of human resources; and
(b)
accompanying soft investments and other activities linked to PO 4 under the European Social Fund Plus as set out in Regulation (EU) 2021/1057.
6.   The ERDF may support the financing of working capital in SMEs in the form of grants, where strictly necessary as a temporary measure to respond to exceptional or unusual circumstances referred to in Article 20 of Regulation (EU) 2021/1060.
7.   Where, upon a request submitted by the Member States concerned, the Commission finds that the requirements laid down in paragraph 6 are fulfilled, it shall adopt an implementing decision specifying the period during which the temporary additional support from ERDF is authorised.
8.   The Commission shall keep the European Parliament and the Council informed about the implementation of paragraph 6 and assess whether the temporary additional support from the ERDF is sufficient to facilitate the use of the fund in response to the exceptional or unusual circumstances. On the basis of its assessment, the Commission shall, where deemed appropriate, make proposals for amendments to this Regulation, including on thematic concentration requirements in Article 4.
9.   The European Parliament or the Council may invite the Commission for a structured dialogue on the application of paragraphs 6, 7 and 8 of this Article in accordance with Article 20(3) of Regulation (EU) 2021/1060.
