Article 9
Transparency of sustainable investments in pre‐contractual disclosures
1.   Where a financial product has sustainable investment as its objective and an index has been designated as a reference benchmark, the information to be disclosed pursuant to Article 6(1) and (3) shall be accompanied by the following:
(a)
information on how the designated index is aligned with that objective;
(b)
an explanation as to why and how the designated index aligned with that objective differs from a broad market index.
2.   Where a financial product has sustainable investment as its objective and no index has been designated as a reference benchmark, the information to be disclosed pursuant to Article 6(1) and (3) shall include an explanation on how that objective is to be attained.
3.   Where a financial product has a reduction in carbon emissions as its objective, the information to be disclosed pursuant to Article 6(1) and (3) shall include the objective of low carbon emission exposure in view of achieving the long‐term global warming objectives of the Paris Agreement.
By way of derogation from paragraph 2 of this Article, where no EU Climate Transition Benchmark or EU Paris‐aligned Benchmark in accordance with Regulation (EU) 2016/1011 of the European Parliament and of the Council (20) is available, the information referred to in Article 6 shall include a detailed explanation of how the continued effort of attaining the objective of reducing carbon emissions is ensured in view of achieving the long‐term global warming objectives of the Paris Agreement.
4.   Financial market participants shall include in the information to be disclosed pursuant to Article 6(1) and (3) an indication of where the methodology used for the calculation of the indices referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article and the benchmarks referred to in the second subparagraph of paragraph 3 of this Article are to be found.
5.   The ESAs shall, through the Joint Committee, develop draft regulatory technical standards to specify the details of the presentation and content of the information to be disclosed pursuant to this Article.
When developing the draft regulatory technical standards referred to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph, the ESAs shall take into account the various types of financial products, their objectives as referred to in paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 and the differences between them as well as the objective that disclosures are to be accurate, fair, clear, not misleading, simple and concise.
The ESAs shall submit the draft regulatory technical standards referred to in the first subparagraph to the Commission by 30 December 2020.
Power is delegated to the Commission to supplement this Regulation by adopting the regulatory technical standards referred to in the first subparagraph in accordance with Articles 10 to 14 of Regulations (EU) No 1093/2010, (EU) No 1094/2010 and (EU) No 1095/2010.
