Article 10
Transparency of the promotion of environmental or social characteristics and of sustainable investments on websites
1.   Financial market participants shall publish and maintain on their websites the following information for each financial product referred to in Article 8(1) and Article 9(1), (2) and (3):
(a)
a description of the environmental or social characteristics or the sustainable investment objective;
(b)
information on the methodologies used to assess, measure and monitor the environmental or social characteristics or the impact of the sustainable investments selected for the financial product, including its data sources, screening criteria for the underlying assets and the relevant sustainability indicators used to measure the environmental or social characteristics or the overall sustainable impact of the financial product;
(c)
the information referred to in Articles 8 and 9;
(d)
the information referred to in Article 11.
The information to be disclosed pursuant to the first subparagraph shall be clear, succinct and understandable to investors. It shall be published in a way that is accurate, fair, clear, not misleading, simple and concise and in a prominent easily accessible area of the website.
2.   The ESAs shall, through the Joint Committee, develop draft regulatory technical standards to specify the details of the content of the information referred to in points (a) and (b) of the first subparagraph of paragraph 1, and the presentation requirements referred to in the second subparagraph of that paragraph.
When developing the draft regulatory technical standards referred to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph, the ESAs shall take into account the various types of financial products, their characteristics and objectives as referred to in paragraph 1 and the differences between them. The ESAs shall update the regulatory technical standards in the light of regulatory and technological developments.
The ESAs shall submit the draft regulatory technical standards referred to in the first subparagraph to the Commission by 30 December 2020.
Power is delegated to the Commission to supplement this Regulation by adopting the regulatory technical standards referred to in the first subparagraph in accordance with Articles 10 to 14 of Regulations (EU) No 1093/2010, (EU) No 1094/2010 and (EU) No 1095/2010.
