Article 18
Management verifications and audits of projects carried out by international organisations
1.   This Article applies to international organisations or their agencies as referred to in point (c)(ii) of the first subparagraph of Article 62(1) of the Financial Regulation whose systems, rules and procedures have been positively assessed by the Commission pursuant to Article 154(4) and (7) of that Regulation for the purpose of indirectly implementing grants financed from the Union budget (‘international organisations’).
2.   Without prejudice to point (a) of the first paragraph of Article 83 of Regulation (EU) 2021/1060 and to Article 129 of the Financial Regulation, where the international organisation is a beneficiary as defined in point (9) Article 2 of Regulation (EU) 2021/1060, the managing authority shall not be required to carry out the management verifications referred to in point (a) of the first subparagraph of Article 74(1) of Regulation (EU) 2021/1060, provided that the international organisation submits to the managing authority the documents referred to in points (a), (b) and (c) of the first subparagraph of Article 155(1) of the Financial Regulation.
3.   Without prejudice to point (c) of the first subparagraph of Article 155(1) of the Financial Regulation, the management declaration to be submitted by the international organisation shall confirm that the project complies with applicable law and the conditions for support of the project.
4.   In addition, where costs are to be reimbursed pursuant to point (a) of Article 53(1) of Regulation (EU) 2021/1060, the management declaration to be submitted by the international organisation shall confirm that:
(a)
invoices and proof of their payment by the beneficiary have been verified;
(b)
the accounting records or accounting codes maintained by the beneficiary for transactions linked to the expenditure declared to the managing authority have been verified.
5.   Where costs are to be reimbursed pursuant to point (b), (c) or (d) of Article 53(1) of Regulation (EU) 2021/1060, the management declaration to be submitted by the international organisation shall confirm that the conditions for reimbursement of expenditure have been met.
6.   The documents referred to in points (a) and (c) of the first subparagraph of Article 155(1) of the Financial Regulation shall be provided to the managing authority together with each payment claim submitted by the beneficiary.
7.   The beneficiary shall submit the accounts to the managing authority each year by 15 October. The accounts shall be accompanied by an opinion of an independent audit body that has been drawn up in accordance with internationally accepted audit standards. That opinion shall establish whether the control systems in place function properly and are cost-effective and whether the underlying transactions are legal and regular. That opinion shall also state whether the audit work puts in doubt the assertions made in the management declarations submitted by the international organisation, including information on suspicions of fraud. That opinion shall provide assurance that expenditure included in the payment claims submitted by the international organisation to the managing authority is legal and regular.
8.   Without prejudice to existing possibilities for carrying out further audits as referred to in Article 127 of the Financial Regulation, the managing authority shall draw up the management declaration referred to in point (f) of the first subparagraph of Article 74(1) of Regulation (EU) 2021/1060. The managing authority shall do so by relying on the documents provided by the international organisation pursuant to paragraphs 2 to 5 and 7 of this Article instead of by relying on the management verifications referred to in Article 74(1) of that Regulation.
9.   The document setting out the conditions for support referred to in Article 73(3) of Regulation (EU) 2021/1060, shall include the requirements set out in this Article.
10.   Paragraph 2 shall not apply, and consequently a managing authority shall be required to carry out management verifications, where:
(a)
that managing authority identifies a specific risk of irregularity or an indication of fraud with respect to a project initiated or implemented by the international organisation;
(b)
the international organisation fails to submit to that managing authority the documents referred to in paragraphs 2 to 5 and 7; or
(c)
the documents referred to in paragraphs 2 to 5 and 7 that have been submitted by the international organisation are incomplete.
11.   Where a project in which an international organisation is a beneficiary as defined in point (9) of Article 2 of Regulation (EU) 2021/1060, is part of a sample as referred to in Article 79 of that Regulation, the audit authority may perform its work on the basis of a subsample of transactions that relate to that project. Where errors are found in the subsample, the audit authority, if relevant, may request the auditor of the international organisation to assess the full scope and the total amount of errors in that project.
