Article 13
Member States’ programmes
1.   Each Member State shall ensure that the priorities addressed in its programme are consistent with and respond to Union priorities and challenges in the area of border management and visa policy and are fully in accordance with the relevant Union acquis and the international obligations of the Union and Member States arising from the international instruments to which they are party. In defining the priorities of their programmes, Member States shall ensure that the implementation measures listed in in Annex II are adequately addressed in their programmes.
Given the internal nature of the Instrument, Member States’ programmes shall primarily serve internal Union policy in accordance with the specific objectives set out in Article 3(2) of this Regulation.
The Commission shall assess the Member States’ programmes in accordance with Article 23 of Regulation (EU) 2021/1060.
2.   Within the resources allocated in Article 10(1), and without prejudice to paragraph 3 of this Article, each Member State shall allocate, within its programme, a minimum of 10 % to the specific objective set out in point (b) of Article 3(2).
3.   A Member State may allocate less than the minimum percentage referred to in paragraph 2 only if it provides a detailed explanation in its programme as to why allocating resources below that level would not jeopardise the achievement of the relevant objective.
4.   The Commission shall ensure that the knowledge and expertise of the relevant decentralised agencies, in particular the European Border and Coast Guard Agency, eu-LISA and the European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights, established by Council Regulation (EC) No 168/2007 (50), are taken into account as regards the areas of their competence, at an early stage and in a timely manner, in the development of the Member States’ programmes.
5.   The Commission shall consult the European Border and Coast Guard Agency on the actions included under operating support to ensure the consistency and complementarity of the actions of the European Border and Coast Guard Agency and those of the Member States regarding border management, to avoid double financing and to achieve cost efficiency. The Commission shall, where necessary, consult eu-LISA on the actions included under operating support for which eu-LISA has particular expertise in accordance with its mandate.
6.   The Commission may involve, where appropriate, relevant decentralised agencies, including those referred to in paragraph 4, in the monitoring and evaluation tasks specified in Section 5, in particular with a view to ensuring that the actions implemented with the support of the Instrument are compliant with the relevant Union acquis and agreed Union priorities.
7.   Following the adoption of recommendations within the scope of this Regulation in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 1053/2013 and the issuing of recommendations in the framework of carrying out vulnerability assessments in accordance with Regulation (EU) 2019/1896, the Member State concerned shall examine, together with the Commission, the most appropriate approach to addressing those recommendations with the support of the Instrument.
8.   The Commission shall, where relevant, involve the European Border and Coast Guard Agency in the process of examining the most appropriate approach to addressing the recommendations referred to in paragraph 7 with the support of the Instrument. In that context, the Commission may, where relevant, draw on the expertise of other Union bodies, offices and agencies with respect to specific issues falling within their areas of competence.
9.   When implementing paragraph 7, the Member State concerned shall make the implementation of measures to address any identified deficiencies, especially measures to address serious deficiencies and assessments of non-compliance, a priority for its programme.
10.   Where necessary, the programme of the Member State in question shall be amended in accordance with Article 24 of Regulation (EU) 2021/1060 to take into account the recommendations referred to in paragraph 7 of this Article.
11.   In cooperation and consultation with the Commission and the European Border and Coast Guard Agency in accordance with the that Agency’s areas of competence, the Member State concerned may reallocate resources under its programme, including those programmed for operating support, with the aim of addressing the recommendations referred to in paragraph 7 where those recommendations have financial implications.
12.   Whenever a Member State decides to implement a project with or in a third country with the support of the Instrument, the Member State concerned shall consult the Commission prior to the approval of the project.
13.   Whenever a Member State decides to implement an action with, in or in relation to a third country with the support of the Instrument in relation to the monitoring, detection, identification, tracking, prevention and interception of unauthorised border crossings for the purpose of detecting, preventing and combating irregular immigration and cross-border crime or for the purpose of contributing to the protection of migrants and contributing to saving the lives of migrants, that Member State shall ensure that it has notified the Commission of any bilateral or multilateral cooperation agreement with that third country in accordance with Article 76(3) of Regulation (EU) 2019/1896.
14.   As regards equipment, including means of transport, and ICT systems required for effective and secure border control, including for search and rescue operations, and purchased with the support of the Instrument:
(a)
the Member States shall ensure that the standards established in accordance with Articles 16 and 64 of Regulation (EU) 2019/1896 are met when launching the purchase procedures for the equipment and ICT systems to be developed with the support of the Instrument;
(b)
all large-scale operating equipment for border management, such as aerial and maritime means of transport and surveillance, purchased by the Member States shall be registered in the technical equipment pool of the European Border and Coast Guard Agency for the purpose of making that equipment available in accordance with Article 64(9) of Regulation (EU) 2019/1896;
(c)
they may be additionally used in the following complementary areas: customs control, maritime operations of a multipurpose character and for achieving the objectives of the Internal Security Fund and of the Asylum, Migration and Integration Fund;
(d)
Member States shall, in order to support coherent planning for capability development for the European Border and Coast Guard and the possible use of joint procurement, communicate to the Commission, as part of the reporting requirement under Article 29, the available multiannual planning for the equipment expected to be purchased under the Instrument, and the Commission shall transmit that information to the European Border and Coast Guard Agency.
Equipment and ICT systems as referred to in the first subparagraph shall only be eligible for financial support from the Instrument where the requirement set out in point (a) of the first subparagraph is met.
For the purposes of point (c) of the first subparagraph, equipment and ICT systems shall remain available and deployable for effective and secure border control activities. The use of equipment in the complementary areas referred to in point (c) of the first subparagraph shall not exceed 30 % of the total period of use of that equipment. ICT systems developed for the purposes of point (c) of the first subparagraph shall provide data and services to the border management systems at national or Union level. Member States shall inform the Commission in the annual performance report of multiple use as referred to in point (c) of the first subparagraph and the place of deployment for multi-purpose equipment and ICT systems.
15.   Where Member States are implementing actions under the Instrument, they shall pay particular attention to their international obligations regarding search and rescue operations at sea. Equipment and ICT systems as referred to in points (a) to (d) of the first subparagraph of paragraph 14 may be used for search and rescue operations in situations which might arise during border surveillance operations at sea.
16.   Training in the field of border management carried out with the support of the Instrument shall be based on the relevant harmonised and quality-assured European educational and common training standards for border and coast guards, in particular the common core curricula referred to in Article 62(6) of Regulation (EU) 2019/1896.
17.   Member States shall in particular pursue the actions listed in Annex IV in their programmes. To address unforeseen or new circumstances and to ensure the effective implementation of funding, the Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 31 to amend the list of actions eligible for higher co-financing rates in Annex IV.
18.   Programming as referred to in Article 22(5) of Regulation (EU) 2021/1060 shall be based on the types of intervention set out in Table 1 of Annex VI to this Regulation and shall include an indicative breakdown of the programmed resources by type of intervention within each specific objective set out in Article 3(2) of this Regulation.
