Article 28
Evaluation
1.   By 31 December 2024, the Commission shall carry out a mid-term evaluation of this Regulation. In addition to what is provided for in Article 45(1) of Regulation (EU) 2021/1060, the mid-term evaluation shall assess the following:
(a)
the effectiveness of the Instrument, including the progress made towards the achievement of its objectives, taking into account all relevant information already available, in particular the annual performance reports referred to in Article 29 and the output and result indicators set out in Annex VIII;
(b)
the efficiency of the use of resources allocated to the Instrument and the efficiency of the management and control measures put in place to implement it;
(c)
the continued relevance and appropriateness of the implementation measures listed in in Annex II;
(d)
the coordination, coherence and complementarity between the actions supported under the Instrument and support provided by other Union funds;
(e)
the Union added value of actions implemented under the Instrument.
That mid-term evaluation shall take into account the results of the retrospective evaluation of the effects of the instrument for financial support for external borders and visa, as part of the Internal Security Fund, for the 2014-2020 period.
2.   In addition to what is provided for in Article 45(2) of the Regulation (EU) 2021/1060, the retrospective evaluation shall include the elements listed in paragraph 1 of this Article. Moreover, the impact of the Instrument shall be evaluated.
3.   The mid-term evaluation and the retrospective evaluation shall be carried out in a timely manner in order to contribute to the decision-making process, including, where appropriate, to the revision of this Regulation.
4.   The Commission shall ensure that information in the mid-term and retrospective evaluations is made publicly available, except in duly justified cases where the release of that information is restricted by law, in particular for reasons of the functioning or security of the external borders as part of European integrated border management, security, public order, criminal investigations or the protection of personal data.
5.   In the mid-term evaluation and retrospective evaluation, the Commission shall pay particular attention to the evaluation of actions implemented with, in or in relation to third countries in accordance with Article 5 and Article 13(12) and (13).

Subsection 2



Rules for shared management


