Article 25
Emergency assistance
1.   The Instrument shall provide financial assistance to address urgent and specific needs in the event of duly justified emergency situations.
In response to such duly justified emergency situations, the Commission may provide emergency assistance within the limits of available resources.
2.   Emergency assistance may take the form of grants awarded directly to the decentralised agencies.
3.   Emergency assistance may be allocated to Member States’ programmes in addition to the allocation under Article 10(1), provided that it is subsequently earmarked as such in the Member States’ programmes. That funding shall not be used for other actions in the Member State’s programme except in duly justified circumstances and as approved by the Commission through the amendment of the Member State’s programme. Pre-financing for emergency assistance may amount to 95 % of the Union contribution, subject to the availability of funds.
4.   Grants implemented under direct management shall be awarded and managed in accordance with Title VIII of the Financial Regulation.
5.   Where necessary for the implementation of an action, emergency assistance may cover expenditure which was incurred prior to the date of submission of the grant application or the request for assistance for that action, provided that that expenditure was not incurred prior to 1 January 2021.
6.   Emergency assistance shall be provided in a manner that is entirely consistent with both the relevant Union acquis and international obligations of the Union and Member States arising from the international instruments to which they are party.
7.   On duly justified imperative grounds of urgency and to ensure that there is a timely availability of resources for emergency assistance, the Commission may separately adopt a financing decision, as referred to in Article 110 of the Financial Regulation, for emergency assistance by way of an immediately applicable implementing act in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 32(4). Such an act shall remain in force for a period not exceeding 18 months.
