Article 8
General provisions on the implementation of the thematic facility
1.   The amount referred to in point (b) of Article 7(3) shall be allocated flexibly through a thematic facility using shared, direct or indirect management as set out in work programmes. Given the internal nature of the Instrument, the thematic facility shall primarily serve internal Union policy in accordance with the specific objectives set out in Article 3(2).
Funding from the thematic facility shall be used for its components, which are as follows:
(a)
specific actions;
(b)
Union actions; and
(c)
emergency assistance as referred to in Article 25.
Technical assistance at the initiative of the Commission, as referred to in Article 35 of Regulation (EU) 2021/1060, shall also receive support from the amount referred to in point (b) of Article 7(3) of this Regulation.
2.   Funding from the thematic facility shall address priorities with a high Union added value or be used to respond to urgent needs, in line with agreed Union priorities as reflected in Annex II, including the need to protect the external borders and to prevent and detect cross-border crime at the external borders, in particular migrant smuggling and trafficking in human beings, and irregular immigration, as well as to effectively manage migratory flows and support the common visa policy.
The funding referred to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph, with the exception of funding used for emergency assistance in accordance with Article 25, shall only support the actions listed in Annex III.
3.   The Commission shall engage with civil society organisations and relevant networks, in particular with a view to preparing and evaluating the work programmes for Union actions financed under the Instrument.
4.   When funding from the thematic facility is provided under direct or indirect management to Member States, the Commission shall ensure that projects affected by a reasoned opinion delivered by the Commission in respect of infringement proceedings under Article 258 TFEU that put in doubt the legality and regularity of expenditure or the performance of projects are not selected.
5.   For the purposes of Article 23 and Article 24(2) of Regulation (EU) 2021/1060, where funding from the thematic facility is implemented under shared management, the Member State concerned shall ensure that, and the Commission shall assess whether, the envisaged actions are not affected by a reasoned opinion delivered by the Commission in respect of infringement proceedings under Article 258 TFEU that put in doubt the legality and regularity of expenditure or the performance of the actions.
6.   The Commission shall establish the overall amount to be made available for the thematic facility under the annual appropriations of the Union budget.
7.   The Commission shall, by means of implementing acts, adopt financing decisions as referred to in Article 110 of the Financial Regulation for the thematic facility identifying objectives and actions to be supported and specifying the amounts for each of the components referred to in the second subparagraph of paragraph 1 of this Article. Financing decisions may be annual or multiannual and may cover one or more components of the thematic facility referred to in the second subparagraph of paragraph 1 of this Article. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 32(3) of this Regulation.
8.   The Commission shall ensure that the distribution of resources among the specific objectives set out in Article 3(2) is fair and transparent. The Commission shall report on the use and the distribution of the thematic facility between the components referred to in the second subparagraph of paragraph 1 of this Article, including on the support provided to actions in or in relation to third countries under the Union actions.
9.   Following the adoption of a financing decision as referred to in paragraph 7, the Commission may amend the Member States’ programmes accordingly.
