Article 5
Scope of support
1.   Within its objectives and in accordance with the implementation measures listed in Annex II, the Instrument shall, in particular, support the actions listed in Annex III.
To address unforeseen or new circumstances, the Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 31 to amend the list of actions in Annex III in order to add new actions.
2.   To achieve its objectives, the Instrument may support, in line with Union priorities, actions as referred to in Annex III in and in relation to third countries, where appropriate, in accordance with Article 20.
3.   As regards actions in and in relation to third countries, the Commission and the Member States, together with the European External Action Service, shall, in accordance with their respective responsibilities, ensure coordination with relevant Union policies, strategies and instruments. They shall, in particular, ensure that actions in and in relation to third countries:
(a)
are carried out in synergy and in coherence with other actions outside the Union supported through other Union instruments;
(b)
are coherent with external Union policy, respect the principle of policy coherence for development and are consistent with the strategic programming documents for the region or country in question;
(c)
focus on measures that are not development-oriented; and
(d)
serve the interests of internal Union policies and are consistent with activities undertaken within the Union.
4.   The following actions shall not be eligible:
(a)
actions as referred to in point (a) of paragraph 1 of Annex III at those internal borders at which controls have not yet been lifted;
(b)
actions related to the temporary reintroduction of border control at internal borders within the meaning of point 1 of Article 2 of Regulation (EU) 2016/399;
(c)
actions of which the primary purpose is customs control.
By way of derogation from the first subparagraph, where an emergency situation occurs, actions as referred to in the first subparagraph may be considered eligible.
