Article 17
Financial instruments
1.   Financial instruments under the COSME programme set up in accordance with Title VIII of Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012 shall be operated with the aim of facilitating access to finance for SMEs, in their start-up, growth and transfer phases. The financial instruments shall include an equity facility and a loan guarantee facility. The allocation of funds to those facilities shall take into account the demand from financial intermediaries.
2.   The financial instruments for SMEs may, where appropriate, be combined with and complement:
(a)
other financial instruments established by Member States and their managing authorities funded by national or regional funds or funded in the context of the operations of the Structural Funds, in accordance with Article 38(1)(a) of Regulation (EU) No 1303/2013;
(b)
other financial instruments established by Member States and their managing authorities funded by national or regional programmes outside the operations of the Structural Funds;
(c)
grants funded by the Union, including under this Regulation.
3.   The Equity Facility for Growth and the Loan Guarantee Facility referred to in Articles 18 and 19 respectively may be complementary to the Member States' use of financial instruments for SMEs within the framework of Union cohesion policy.
4.   The Equity Facility for Growth and the Loan Guarantee Facility may, where appropriate, allow the pooling of financial resources with Member States and/or regions willing to contribute part of the Structural Funds allocated to them in accordance with Article 38(1)(a) of Regulation (EU) No 1303/2013.
5.   The financial instruments may generate acceptable returns to meet the objectives of other partners or investors. The Equity Facility for Growth may operate on a subordinated basis but shall aim to preserve the value of assets provided by the Union budget.
6.   The Equity Facility for Growth and the Loan Guarantee Facility shall be implemented in accordance with Title VIII of Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012 and Commission Delegated Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 1268/2012 (12).
7.   The financial instruments under the COSME programme shall be developed and implemented in complementarity and coherence with those established for SMEs under the Horizon 2020 programme.
8.   In accordance with Article 60(1) of Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012, the entities entrusted with the implementation of the financial instruments shall ensure visibility of Union action when they manage Union funds. To this end, the entrusted entity shall ensure that financial intermediaries explicitly inform final recipients that financing was made possible through the support of the financial instruments under the COSME programme. The Commission shall ensure that the ex post publication of information on recipients in accordance with Article 60(2)(e) of Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012 is easily accessible to potential final recipients.
9.   Repayments generated by the second window of the High Growth and Innovative SME Facility established under Decision No 1639/2006/EC and received after 31 December 2013 shall be assigned, in accordance with Article 21(4) of Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012, to the Equity Facility for Growth referred to in Article 18 of this Regulation.
10.   The financial instruments shall be implemented in compliance with the relevant State aid rules of the Union.
