Article 5
Budget
1.   The financial envelope for the implementation of the COSME programme is set at EUR 2 298,243 million in current prices, of which no less than 60 % shall be allocated to financial instruments.
The annual appropriations shall be authorised by the European Parliament and by the Council within the limits of the multiannual financial framework.
2.   The financial envelope established under this Regulation may also cover expenses pertaining to preparatory, monitoring, control, audit and evaluation activities which are required for the management of the COSME programme and the achievement of its objectives. In particular it shall cover, in a cost effective manner, studies, meetings of experts, information and communication actions, including corporate communication of the political priorities of the Union as far as they are related to the general objectives of the COSME programme, expenses linked to IT networks focusing on information processing and exchange, together with all other technical and administrative assistance expenses incurred by the Commission in the management of the COSME programme.
Those expenses shall not exceed 5 % of the value of the financial envelope.
3.   The financial envelope for the COSME programme shall allocate the indicative amounts of 21,5 % of the value of the financial envelope to the specific objective referred to in Article 4(1)(b), 11 % to the specific objective referred to in Article 4(1)(c) and 2,5 % to the specific objective referred to in Article 4(1)(d). The Commission may depart from these indicative amounts but not by more than 5 % of the value of the financial envelope in each case. Should it prove necessary to exceed that limit, the Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 23 modifying those indicative amounts.
4.   The financial allocation may also cover the technical and administrative assistance expenses necessary to ensure the transition between the COSME programme and the measures adopted under Decision No 1639/2006/EC. If necessary, appropriations may be entered in the budget beyond 2020 to cover similar expenses, in order to enable the management of actions not yet completed by 31 December 2020.
