Article 18
Equity Facility for Growth
1.   The Equity Facility for Growth (EFG) shall be implemented as a window of a single Union equity financial instrument supporting Union enterprises' growth and research and innovation (R&I) from the early stage, including seed, up to the growth stage. The single Union equity financial instrument shall be financially supported by the Horizon 2020 programme and the COSME programme.
2.   The EFG shall focus on funds that provide: venture capital and mezzanine finance, such as subordinated and participating loans, to expansion and growth-stage enterprises, in particular those operating across borders, while having the possibility of making investments in early-stage funds in conjunction with the Equity Facility for R&I under the Horizon 2020 programme and providing co-investment facilities for business angels. In the case of early stage investments, the investment from EFG shall not exceed 20 % of the total Union investment except in cases of multi-stage funds and funds-of-funds, where funding from the EFG and the Equity Facility for R&I under the Horizon 2020 programme shall be provided on a pro rata basis, on the basis of the funds' investment policy. The Commission may decide to amend the 20 % threshold in the light of changing market conditions. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 21(2).
3.   The EFG and the Equity Facility for R&I under the Horizon 2020 programme shall use the same delivery mechanism.
4.   Support from the EFG shall be in the form of one of the following investments:
(a)
directly by the European Investment Fund or other entities entrusted with the implementation of the EFG on behalf of the Commission; or
(b)
by funds-of-funds or investment vehicles investing across borders established by the European Investment Fund or other entities (including private or public sector managers) entrusted with the implementation of the EFG on behalf of the Commission together with investors from private and/or public financial institutions.
5.   The EFG shall invest in intermediary risk capital funds including in funds-of-funds, providing investments for SMEs typically in their expansion and growth-stage. Investments under the EFG shall be long-term, i.e. usually involving 5 to 15 year positions in risk capital funds. In any event, the lifetime of the investments under the EFG shall not exceed 20 years from the time of signature of the agreement between the Commission and the entity entrusted with its implementation.
