Article 19
The Loan Guarantee Facility
1.   The Loan Guarantee Facility (LGF) shall provide:
(a)
counter-guarantees and other risk sharing arrangements for guarantee schemes including, where appropriate, co-guarantees;
(b)
direct guarantees and other risk sharing arrangements for any other financial intermediaries meeting the eligibility criteria referred to in paragraph 5.
2.   The LGF shall be implemented as part of a single Union debt financial instrument for Union enterprises' growth and R&I, using the same delivery mechanism as the SME demand-driven window of the Debt Facility for R&I under the Horizon 2020 programme (RSI II).
3.   The LGF shall consist of:
(a)
guarantees for debt financing (including via subordinated and participating loans, leasing, or bank guarantees), which shall reduce the particular difficulties that viable SMEs face in accessing finance, either due to their perceived high risk or their lack of sufficient available collateral;
(b)
securitisation of SME debt finance portfolios, which shall mobilise additional debt financing for SMEs under appropriate risk-sharing arrangements with the targeted institutions. Support for those securitisation transactions shall be conditional upon an undertaking by the originating institutions to use a significant part of the resulting liquidity or the mobilised capital for new SME lending within a reasonable period of time. The amount of this new debt financing shall be calculated in relation to the amount of the guaranteed portfolio risk. This amount and the period of time shall be negotiated individually with each originating institution.
4.   The LGF shall be operated by the European Investment Fund or other entities entrusted with the implementation of the LGF on behalf of the Commission. Individual guarantees under the LGF may have a maturity of up to 10 years.
5.   Eligibility under the LGF shall be determined for each intermediary on the basis of their activities and how effective they are in helping SME in accessing funding for viable projects. The LGF may be used by intermediaries supporting business in financing, inter alia, acquisition of tangible and intangible assets, working capital and for business transfers. Criteria relating to securitisation of SME debt financing portfolios shall include individual and multi-seller transactions as well as multi-country transactions. Eligibility shall be based on good market practices, in particular regarding the credit quality and risk diversification of the securitised portfolio.
6.   The LGF shall, except for loans in the securitised portfolio, cover loans up to EUR 150 000 and with a minimum maturity of 12 months. The LGF shall also cover loans above EUR 150 000 in cases where SMEs who meet the criteria to be eligible under the COSME programme do not meet the criteria to be eligible under the SME window in the Debt Facility of the Horizon 2020 programme, and with a minimum maturity of 12 months.
Above that threshold, it shall be the responsibility of the financial intermediaries to demonstrate whether the SME is eligible or not under the SME window in the Debt Facility of the Horizon 2020 programme.
7.   The LGF shall be designed in such way as to make it possible to report on SMEs supported, both in terms of number and volume of loans.
