Article 15
Monitoring and evaluation
1.   The Commission shall monitor the implementation and management of the COSME programme.
2.   The Commission shall draw up an annual monitoring report examining the efficiency and effectiveness of supported actions in terms of financial implementation, results, costs and, where possible, impact. The report shall include information on beneficiaries, when possible, for each call for proposals, information on the amount of climate-related expenditure and the impact of support to climate-change objectives, relevant data regarding the loans provided by the Loan Guarantee Facility above and below EUR 150 000 to the extent that the collection of such information does not create an unjustified administrative burden for enterprises, especially SMEs. The monitoring report shall include the annual report on each financial instrument as required by Article 140(8) of Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012.
3.   By 2018 at the latest, the Commission shall establish an interim evaluation report on the achievement of the objectives of all the actions supported under the COSME programme at the level of results and impacts, the efficiency of the use of resources and its European added value, with a view to a decision on the renewal, modification or suspension of the measures. The interim evaluation report shall also address the scope for simplification, its internal and external coherence, the continued relevance of all objectives, as well as the contribution of the measures to the Union priorities of smart, sustainable and inclusive growth. It shall take into account evaluation results on the long-term impact of the predecessor measures and shall feed into a decision on a possible renewal, modification or suspension of a subsequent measure.
4.   The Commission shall establish a final evaluation report on the longer-term impact and sustainability of effects of the measures.
5.   All grant beneficiaries and other parties involved who have received Union funds under this Regulation shall provide the Commission with the appropriate data and information necessary to permit the monitoring and evaluation of the measures concerned.
6.   The Commission shall submit the reports referred to in paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 to the European Parliament and the Council and make them public.
