Article 11
Actions to improve the framework conditions for the competitiveness and sustainability of Union enterprises, particularly SMEs
1.   The Commission shall support actions to improve the framework conditions for the competitiveness and sustainability of Union enterprises, particularly SMEs, so as to enhance the effectiveness, coherence, coordination and consistency of national and regional policies promoting the competitiveness, sustainability and growth of Union enterprises.
2.   The Commission may support specific actions to improve the framework conditions for enterprises, particularly SMEs, through a reduction in and avoidance of unnecessary administrative and regulatory burdens. Such actions may include measuring on a regular basis the impact of relevant Union law on SMEs, where appropriate by means of a scoreboard, support for independent expert groups and the exchange of information and good practices, including on the systematic application of the SME test at Union and Member State level.
3.   The Commission may support actions intended to develop new competitiveness and business development strategies. Such actions may include the following:
(a)
measures to improve the design, implementation and evaluation of policies affecting the competitiveness and sustainability of enterprises, including through the sharing of good practices on framework conditions and on the management of world-class clusters and business networks; and through promoting transnational collaboration among clusters and business networks, the development of sustainable products, services, technologies and processes, as well as resource- and energy-efficiency and corporate social responsibility;
(b)
measures to address international aspects of competitiveness policies, focusing particularly on policy cooperation between Member States, other countries participating in the COSME programme and the Union's global trade partners;
(c)
measures to improve SME policy development, cooperation between policy makers, peer reviews and exchange of good practices among Member States, taking into account, where appropriate, available evidence and the views of stakeholders and particularly with a view to making it easier for SMEs to access Union programmes and measures, in accordance with the SBA Action Plan.
4.   The Commission may, through promoting coordination, support actions taken in the Member States with a view to accelerating the emergence of competitive industries with market potential. Such support may include actions to promote the exchange of good practices and identifying skills and training requirements from industries, especially SMEs, in particular e-skills. It may also include actions to encourage the take-up of new business models and the cooperation of SMEs in new value chains as well as the commercial use of relevant ideas for new products and services.
5.   The Commission may complement the actions of Member States to enhance the competitiveness and sustainability of Union SMEs in areas characterised by a significant growth potential, especially those with a high proportion of SMEs, such as the tourism sector. Such activities may include promoting cooperation between Member States, particularly through the exchange of good practices.
