Whereas:
(1)
Technical difficulties in breeding, due to complex genetic backgrounds or to the slow or technically complicated reproduction of the species Asparagus officinalis L. and the species groups flower bulbs, woody small fruits and woody ornamentals, need to be addressed by means of investments in research and development activities. Once protection of plant variety rights is granted for that species and those species groups, it takes years to multiply the plants and to build up a stock that is sufficiently large to generate a reasonable income. Accordingly, the time during which the holder of the plant variety rights can generate income based on that protection is limited. To encourage investments in research and development for varieties of that species and those species groups, it is necessary to prolong the term of protection of plant variety rights and incentivise breeding activities to develop new varieties in order to meet the needs of farmers and consumers and to address the impact of climate change. Those investments require more time to be profitable than for the overwhelming majority of other species, such as agricultural crops, which often have a shorter life span and a larger and wider range of consumers.
(2)
The market introduction and market uptake of a new variety of the species Asparagus officinalis L. and the species groups flower bulbs, woody small fruits and woody ornamentals require more time in order for that new variety to be profitable than for other species, as experience has shown that such a new variety reveals its commercial value only in the long term. For those reasons, an equitable refunding of investments in research and development is only possible at a fairly late stage of the protection of that species and those species groups in comparison with other species.
(3)
Council Regulation (EC) No 2100/94 (3) establishes a system of Community plant variety rights as the sole and exclusive form of Community industrial property rights for plant varieties. In accordance with Article 19(1) of that Regulation, the term of the Community plant variety right is to run until the end of the 25th calendar year or, in the case of varieties of vine and tree species, until the end of the 30th calendar year, following the year of grant.
(4)
In order to establish a legal environment conducive to achieving an equitable refunding, it is appropriate to extend by a further five years the term of the Community plant variety rights for varieties of the species Asparagus officinalis L. and of the species groups flower bulbs, woody small fruits and woody ornamentals. That extension should apply to rights granted before, on or after the date of entry into force of this Regulation.
(5)
For reasons of consistency, such extension should apply to all Community plant variety rights for varieties of the species Asparagus officinalis L. and of the species groups flower bulbs, woody small fruits and woody ornamentals.
(6)
The period of extension should be reduced if national property rights for those varieties have been effective in a Member State prior to the grant of a Community plant variety right and, accordingly, would already have allowed breeders to exploit their varieties,
HAVE ADOPTED THIS REGULATION:
