Article 104
Financial corrections by the Commission
1.   The Commission shall make financial corrections by reducing support from the Funds to a programme where it concludes that:
(a)
there is a serious deficiency which has put at risk the support from the Funds already paid to the programme;
(b)
expenditure contained in accepted accounts is irregular and was not detected and reported by the Member State;
(c)
the Member State has not complied with its obligations under Article 97 prior to the opening of the financial correction procedure by the Commission.
Where the Commission applies flat-rate or extrapolated financial corrections, this shall be carried out in accordance with Annex XXV.
2.   Before taking a decision on a financial correction, the Commission shall inform the Member State of its conclusions and give the Member State the opportunity to present, within 2 months, its observations and to demonstrate that the actual extent of irregularity is less than the Commission’s assessment. The deadline can be extended if mutually agreed.
3.   Where the Member State does not accept the conclusions of the Commission, the Member State shall be invited to a hearing by the Commission, in order to ensure that all relevant information and observations are available to form the basis for Commission conclusions on the application of the financial correction.
4.   The Commission shall decide on a financial correction taking into account the extent, the frequency and financial implications of the irregularities or serious deficiencies, by means of an implementing act within 10 months of the date of the hearing or of the submission of additional information as required by the Commission.
When deciding on a financial correction, the Commission shall take account of all information and observations submitted.
Where a Member State agrees to the financial correction for cases referred to in points (a) and (c) of the first subparagraph of paragraph 1 before the adoption of the decision referred to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph, the Member State may reuse the amounts concerned. That possibility shall not apply to a case of a financial correction under point (b) of the first subparagraph of paragraph 1.
5.   The Fund-specific rules for the EMFAF may lay down specific bases for financial corrections by the Commission linked to non-compliance with rules applicable under the Common Fisheries Policy.
6.   The Fund-specific rules for the JTF may lay down specific bases for financial corrections by the Commission linked to the under-achievement of targets established for the JTF.
