Article 63
Eligibility
1.   The eligibility of expenditure shall be determined on the basis of national rules, except where specific rules are laid down in, or on the basis of, this Regulation or the Fund-specific Regulations.
2.   Expenditure shall be eligible for a contribution from the Funds if it has been incurred by a beneficiary or the private partner of a PPP operation and paid in implementing operations, between the date of submission of the programme to the Commission or from 1 January 2021, whichever date is earlier, and 31 December 2029.
For costs reimbursed pursuant to points (b), (c) and (f) of Article 53(1), the actions constituting the basis for reimbursement shall be carried out between the date of submission of the programme to the Commission or from 1 January 2021, whichever is earlier, and 31 December 2029.
3.   For the ERDF, expenditure related to operations covering more than one category of region as set out in Article 108(2) within a Member State shall be allocated to the categories of region concerned on a pro rata basis, based on objective criteria.
For the ESF+, expenditure related to operations may be allocated to any of the categories of region of the programme under the condition that the operation contributes to the achievement of the specific objectives of the programme.
For the JTF, expenditure related to operations shall contribute to the implementation of the relevant territorial just transition plan.
4.   All or part of an operation may be implemented outside of a Member State, including outside the Union, provided that the operation contributes to the objectives of the programme.
5.   For grants taking the forms of points (b), (c) and (d) of Article 53(1), the expenditure which shall be eligible for a contribution from the Funds shall equal the amounts calculated in accordance with Article 53(3).
6.   Operations shall not be selected for support by the Funds where they have been physically completed or fully implemented before the application for funding under the programme is submitted, irrespective of whether all related payments have been made. This paragraph shall not apply to the EMFAF compensation for additional costs in outermost regions pursuant to Article 24 of the EMFAF Regulation and to support from the additional funding for the outermost regions pursuant to point (e) of Article 110(1) of this Regulation.
7.   Expenditure which becomes eligible as a result of a programme amendment shall be eligible from the date of the submission of the corresponding request to the Commission.
For the ERDF, the Cohesion Fund and the JTF, expenditure becomes eligible as a result of a programme amendment when a new type of intervention referred to in Table 1 of Annex I or, for the EMFAF, the AMIF, the ISF and the BMVI, in the Fund-specific Regulations is added in the programme.
Where a programme is amended in order to provide a response to natural disasters, the programme may provide that the eligibility of expenditure relating to such amendment starts from the date when the natural disaster occurred.
8.   Where a new programme is approved, expenditure shall be eligible from the date of submission of the corresponding request to the Commission.
9.   An operation may receive support from one or more Funds or from one or more programmes and from other Union instruments. In such cases, expenditure declared in a payment application for one of the Funds shall not be declared for either of the following:
(a)
support from another Fund or Union instrument;
(b)
support from the same Fund under another programme.
The amount of expenditure to be entered into a payment application of a Fund may be calculated for each Fund and for the programme or programmes concerned on a pro rata basis, in accordance with the document setting out the conditions for support.
