Article 15
Enabling conditions
1.   For the specific objectives, enabling conditions are laid down in this Regulation.
Annex III contains horizontal enabling conditions applicable to all specific objectives and the criteria necessary for the assessment of their fulfilment.
Annex IV contains thematic enabling conditions for the ERDF, the ESF+ and the Cohesion Fund and the criteria necessary for the assessment of their fulfilment.
The enabling condition regarding the tools and capacity for effective application of State aid rules shall not be applicable to programmes supported by the AMIF, the ISF or the BMVI.
2.   When preparing a programme or introducing a new specific objective as part of a programme amendment, the Member State shall assess whether the enabling conditions linked to the selected specific objective are fulfilled. An enabling condition is fulfilled where all the related criteria are met. The Member State shall identify in each programme or in the programme amendment the fulfilled and non-fulfilled enabling conditions and shall provide a justification where it considers that an enabling condition has been fulfilled.
3.   Where an enabling condition is not fulfilled at the time of approval of the programme or the programme amendment, the Member State shall inform the Commission as soon as it considers that the enabling condition has been fulfilled with a justification of the fulfilment.
4.   The Commission shall, as soon as possible and no later than 3 months after receipt of the information referred to in paragraph 3, carry out an assessment and inform the Member State whether it agrees with the Member State regarding the fulfilment of the enabling condition.
Where the Commission disagrees with the Member State regarding the fulfilment of the enabling condition, it shall inform the Member State and set out its assessment.
Where the Member State disagrees with the Commission’s assessment, it shall present its observations within 1 month and the Commission shall proceed in accordance with the first subparagraph.
Where the Member State accepts the Commission’s assessment, it shall proceed in accordance with paragraph 3.
5.   Without prejudice to Article 105, expenditure related to operations linked to the specific objective may be included in payment applications but shall not be reimbursed by the Commission until the Commission has informed the Member State of the fulfilment of the enabling condition pursuant to the first subparagraph of paragraph 4 of this Article.
The first subparagraph shall not apply to operations that contribute to the fulfilment of the corresponding enabling condition.
6.   The Member State shall ensure that enabling conditions remain fulfilled and respected throughout the programming period. It shall inform the Commission of any modification impacting the fulfilment of enabling conditions.
Where the Commission considers that an enabling condition is no longer fulfilled, it shall inform the Member State setting out its assessment. Subsequently, the procedure set out in the second and third subparagraphs of paragraph 4 shall be followed.
Where the Commission concludes that the non-fulfilment of the enabling condition persists and without prejudice to Article 105, based on the observations of the Member State, expenditure related to the specific objective concerned may be included in payment applications but shall not be reimbursed by the Commission until the Commission has informed the Member State of the fulfilment of the enabling condition pursuant to the first subparagraph of paragraph 4 of this Article.
7.   Annex IV shall not apply to priorities supported by the JTF or to any ERDF and ESF+ resources transferred to the JTF in accordance with Article 27.
