Article 81
Management verifications and audits of financial instruments
1.   The managing authority shall carry out on-the-spot management verifications in accordance with Article 74(1) only at the level of bodies implementing the financial instrument and, in the context of guarantee funds, at the level of bodies delivering the underlying new loans. The managing authority may rely on verifications carried out by external bodies and not carry out on-the-spot management verifications, provided that it has sufficient evidence of the competence of these external bodies.
2.   The managing authority shall not carry out on-the-spot verifications at the level of the EIB or other international financial institutions in which a Member State is a shareholder.
However, the EIB or other international financial institutions in which a Member State is a shareholder shall provide control reports supporting the payment claims to the managing authority.
3.   The audit authority shall carry out system audits and audits of operations in accordance with Article 77, 79 or 83, as appropriate, at the level of bodies implementing the financial instrument and, in the context of guarantee funds, at the level of bodies delivering the underlying new loans. The audit results of external auditors of bodies implementing the financial instrument may be taken into account by the audit authority for the purposes of the overall assurance and on this basis, the audit authority may decide to limit its own audit work.
4.   In the context of guarantee funds, the bodies responsible for the audit of programmes may conduct audits of the bodies providing new underlying loans only when one or more of the following situations occur:
(a)
supporting documents, providing evidence of the support from the financial instrument to final recipients, are not available at the level of the managing authority or at the level of the bodies implementing the financial instrument;
(b)
there is evidence that the documents available at the level of the managing authority or at the level of the bodies implementing the financial instrument do not represent a true and accurate record of the support provided.
5.   The audit authority shall not carry out audits at the level of the EIB or other international financial institutions in which a Member State is a shareholder, for financial instruments implemented by them.
However, the EIB or other international financial institutions in which a Member State is a shareholder shall provide to the Commission and to the audit authority an annual audit report drawn up by their external auditors by the end of each calendar year. This report shall cover the elements included in Annex XXI, and constitute the basis for the audit authority’s work.
6.   The EIB or other international financial institutions shall provide to the programme authorities all the necessary documents to enable them to fulfil their obligations.
