Article 70
Commission powers and responsibilities
1.   The Commission shall satisfy itself that Member States have management and control systems that comply with this Regulation and that these systems function effectively and efficiently during the implementation of the programmes. The Commission shall draw up, for the purposes of its own audit work, an audit strategy and an audit plan which shall be based on a risk-assessment.
The Commission and the audit authorities shall coordinate their audit plans.
2.   The Commission shall carry out audits up to three calendar years following the acceptance of the accounts in which the expenditure concerned was included. That period shall not apply to operations where there is a suspicion of fraud.
3.   For the purpose of their audits, Commission officials or their authorised representatives shall have access to all necessary records, documents and metadata, irrespective of the medium in which they are stored, relating to operations supported by the Funds or to management and control systems and shall receive copies in the specific format requested.
4.   For on-the-spot audits, the following shall also apply:
(a)
the Commission shall give at least 15 working days’ notice for the audit to the competent programme authority, except in urgent cases; officials or authorised representatives of the Member State may take part in such audits;
(b)
where the application of national provisions reserves certain acts for agents specifically designated by national legislation, Commission officials and authorised representatives shall have access to the information thus obtained without prejudice to the competences of national courts and in full respect of the fundamental rights of the legal subjects concerned;
(c)
the Commission shall transmit the preliminary audit findings to the competent Member State authority no later than 3 months after the last day of the audit;
(d)
the Commission shall transmit the audit report no later than 3 months from the date of receiving a complete reply from the competent Member State authority to the preliminary audit findings; the Member State’s reply shall be considered complete in the absence of a request from the Commission to provide further information or a revised document within 2 months from the date of receipt of the Member State’s response.
For the purpose of complying with the time limits set out in points (c) and (d) of the first subparagraph of this paragraph, the Commission shall make available the preliminary audit findings and the audit report in at least one of the official languages of the institutions of the Union.
The time limits referred to in points (c) and (d) of the first subparagraph of this paragraph may be extended where it is deemed necessary and agreed upon between the Commission and the competent Member State authority.
Where a time limit is set for a reply by the Member State to the preliminary audit findings or the audit report referred to in points (c) and (d) of the first subparagraph of this paragraph, that time limit shall start upon their receipt by the competent Member State authority in at least one of the official languages of the Member State concerned.
