Article 24
Amendment of programmes
1.   The Member State may submit a reasoned request for an amendment of a programme, together with the amended programme, setting out the expected impact of that amendment on the achievement of the objectives.
2.   The Commission shall assess the amendment and its compliance with this Regulation and with the Fund-specific Regulations, including requirements at national level, and may make observations within 2 months of the submission of the amended programme.
3.   The Member State shall review the amended programme, taking into account the observations made by the Commission.
4.   The Commission shall adopt a decision approving the amendment of a programme no later than 4 months after its submission by the Member State.
5.   For programmes supported by the ERDF, the ESF+, the Cohesion Fund and the JTF, the Member State may transfer during the programming period an amount of up to 8 % of the initial allocation of a priority and no more than 4 % of the programme budget to another priority of the same Fund of the same programme. For programmes supported by the ERDF, the ESF+ and the JTF, the transfer shall only concern allocations for the same category of region.
For programmes supported by the EMFAF, the Member State may transfer during the programming period an amount of up to 8 % of the initial allocation of a specific objective to another specific objective, including technical assistance implemented pursuant to Article 36(4).
For programmes supported by the AMIF, the ISF and the BMVI, the Member State may transfer during the programming period allocations between types of actions within the same priority and, in addition, an amount of up to 15 % of the initial allocation of a priority to another priority of the same Fund.
Such transfers shall not affect previous years. The transfers and related changes shall be considered to be not substantial and shall not require a decision of the Commission approving the amendment of the programme. They shall however, comply with all regulatory requirements and shall be approved by the monitoring committee in advance pursuant to point (d) of Article 40(2). The Member State shall submit to the Commission the amended table referred to under points (g)(ii), (iii) or (iv) of Article 22(3), as applicable, together with any related changes in the programme.
6.   The approval of the Commission shall not be required for corrections of a purely clerical or editorial nature that do not affect the implementation of the programme. Member States shall inform the Commission of such corrections.
7.   For programmes supported by the EMFAF, amendments of the programmes relating to the introduction of indicators shall not require the approval of the Commission.
