Article 5
Policy objectives
1.   The ERDF, the ESF+, the Cohesion Fund and the EMFAF shall support the following policy objectives:
(a)
a more competitive and smarter Europe by promoting innovative and smart economic transformation and regional ICT connectivity;
(b)
a greener, low-carbon transitioning towards a net zero carbon economy and resilient Europe by promoting clean and fair energy transition, green and blue investment, the circular economy, climate change mitigation and adaptation, risk prevention and management, and sustainable urban mobility;
(c)
a more connected Europe by enhancing mobility;
(d)
a more social and inclusive Europe implementing the European Pillar of Social Rights;
(e)
a Europe closer to citizens by fostering the sustainable and integrated development of all types of territories and local initiatives.
The JTF shall support the specific objective of enabling regions and people to address the social, employment, economic and environmental impacts of the transition towards the Union’s 2030 targets for energy and climate and a climate-neutral economy of the Union by 2050, based on the Paris Agreement.
The first subparagraph of paragraph 1 of this Article shall not apply to the resources of the ERDF and the ESF+ that are transferred to the JTF in accordance with Article 27.
2.   The ERDF, the ESF+, the Cohesion Fund and the JTF shall contribute to the actions of the Union, leading to the strengthening of its economic, social and territorial cohesion in accordance with Article 174 TFEU, by pursuing the following goals:
(a)
the Investment for jobs and growth goal in Member States and regions, to be supported by the ERDF, the ESF+, the Cohesion Fund and the JTF; and
(b)
the European territorial cooperation goal (Interreg), to be supported by the ERDF.
3.   Member States and the Commission shall promote the coordination, complementarity and coherence between the Funds and other Union instruments and funds. They shall optimise mechanisms for coordination between those responsible to avoid duplication during planning and implementation. Accordingly, Member States and the Commission shall also take into account the relevant country-specific recommendations in the programming and implementation of the Funds.
