Article 111
Transferability of resources
1.   The Commission may accept a proposal by a Member State, in its submission of the Partnership Agreement or in the context of the mid-term review, for a transfer:
(a)
adding up to not more than 5 % of the initial allocations for less developed regions to transition regions or more developed regions and from transition regions to more developed regions;
(b)
from the allocations for more developed regions or transition regions to less developed regions and from more developed regions to transition regions.
By way of derogation from point (a) of the first subparagraph, the Commission may accept an additional transfer of up to 10 % of the total allocations for less developed regions to transition regions or more developed regions within those Member States whose GNI per capita, measured in PPS for the period 2015- 2017, is less than 90 % of the average GNI per capita of the EU-27. Resources of any additional transfer shall be used to contribute to the policy objectives referred to in points (a) and (b) of Article 5(1).
2.   The total allocations to each Member State in respect of the Investment for jobs and growth goal and the European territorial cooperation goal (Interreg) shall not be transferable between these goals.
3.   In order to uphold the effective contribution of the Funds to the actions referred to in Article 5(2), and by way of derogation from paragraph 2 of this Article, the Commission may, in duly justified circumstances, and subject to the condition laid down in paragraph 4 of this Article, accept by means of an implementing act a proposal by a Member State in its first submission of the Partnership Agreement to transfer a part of its appropriations for the European territorial cooperation goal (Interreg) to the Investment for jobs and growth goal.
4.   The share of the European territorial cooperation goal (Interreg) in the Member State making the proposal referred to in paragraph 3 shall be not less than 35 % of the total allocated to that Member State in respect of the Investment for jobs and growth goal and the European territorial cooperation goal (Interreg), and after transfer shall be not less than 25 % of that total.
