Article 112
Determination of co-financing rates
1.   The decision approving a programme shall fix the co-financing rate and the maximum amount of support from the Funds for each priority.
2.   For each priority, the Commission decision shall set out whether the co-financing rate for the priority is to be applied to either of the following:
(a)
total contribution, including public and private contribution;
(b)
public contribution.
3.   The co-financing rate for the Investment for jobs and growth goal at the level of each priority shall not be higher than:
(a)
85 % for the less developed regions;
(b)
70 % for transition regions that were classified as less developed regions for the 2014-2020 period;
(c)
60 % for the transition regions;
(d)
50 % for more developed regions that were classified as transition regions or had a GDP per capita below 100 % for the 2014-2020 period;
(e)
40 % for the more developed regions.
The co-financing rates set out under point (a) of the first subparagraph shall also apply to the outermost regions, including the additional allocation for the outermost regions.
The co-financing rate for the Cohesion Fund at the level of each priority shall not be higher than 85 %.
The ESF+ Regulation may establish higher co-financing rates in accordance with Articles 10 and 14 of that Regulation.
The co-financing rate, applicable to the region where the territory or territories identified in the territorial just transition plans are located, for the priority supported by the JTF shall not be higher than:
(a)
85 % for less developed regions;
(b)
70 % for transition regions;
(c)
50 % for more developed regions.
4.   The co-financing rate for Interreg programmes shall be no higher than 80 % except in cases where the Interreg Regulation establishes higher co-financing rates for Interreg strand D and for external cross-border cooperation programmes.
5.   The maximum co-financing rates listed under paragraphs 3 and 4 shall be increased by ten percentage points for priorities entirely delivered through community-led local development.
6.   Technical assistance measures implemented at the initiative of, or on behalf of, the Commission may be financed at the rate of 100 %.
TITLE IX

DELEGATION OF POWER, IMPLEMENTING, TRANSITIONAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS

