Article 103
Financial corrections by Member States
1.   Member States shall protect the Union budget and apply financial corrections by cancelling all or part of the support from the Funds to an operation or programme where expenditure declared to the Commission is found to be irregular.
2.   Financial corrections shall be recorded in the accounts for the accounting year in which the cancellation is decided.
3.   The support from the Funds cancelled may be reused by the Member State within the programme concerned except for an operation that was subject of that correction or, where a financial correction is made for a systemic irregularity, for any operation affected by the systemic irregularity.
4.   The Fund-specific rules for the EMFAF may lay down specific bases for financial corrections by the Member States linked to non-compliance with rules applicable under the Common Fisheries Policy.
5.   By way of derogation from paragraphs 1, 2 and 3, in operations comprising financial instruments, a contribution cancelled in accordance with this Article, as a result of an individual irregularity, may be reused within the same operation under the following conditions:
(a)
where the irregularity that gives rise to the cancellation of the contribution is detected at the level of the final recipient, only for other final recipients within the same financial instrument;
(b)
where the irregularity that gives rise to the cancellation of the contribution is detected at the level of the body implementing the specific fund, where a financial instrument is implemented through a structure with a holding fund, only for other bodies implementing specific funds.
Where that irregularity that gives rise to the cancellation of the contribution is detected at the level of the body implementing the holding fund, or at the level of the body implementing the specific fund where a financial instrument is implemented through a structure without a holding fund, the contribution cancelled shall not be reused within the same operation.
Where a financial correction is made for a systemic irregularity, the contribution cancelled shall not be reused for any operation affected by the systemic irregularity.
6.   The bodies implementing financial instruments shall reimburse to Member States programme contributions affected by irregularities, together with interest and any other gains generated by these contributions.
The bodies implementing financial instruments shall not reimburse to Member States the amounts referred to in the first subparagraph provided that those bodies demonstrate for a given irregularity that the following cumulative conditions are fulfilled:
(a)
the irregularity occurred at the level of final recipients or, in the case of a holding fund, at the level of bodies implementing specific funds or final recipients;
(b)
the bodies implementing financial instruments carried out their obligations, in relation to the programme contributions affected by the irregularity, in accordance with applicable law and acted with the degree of professional care, transparency and diligence expected from a professional body experienced in implementing financial instruments;
(c)
the amounts affected by the irregularity could not be recovered notwithstanding that the bodies implementing financial instruments pursued all applicable contractual and legal measures with due diligence.
