Article 74
Programme management by the managing authority
1.   The managing authority shall:
(a)
carry out management verifications to verify that the co-financed products and services have been delivered, that the operation complies with applicable law, the programme and the conditions for support of the operation, and:
(i)
where costs are to be reimbursed pursuant to point (a) of Article 53(1), that the amount of expenditure claimed by the beneficiaries in relation to these costs has been paid and that beneficiaries maintain separate accounting records or use appropriate accounting codes for all transactions relating to the operation;
(ii)
where costs are to be reimbursed pursuant to points (b), (c) and (d) of Article 53(1), that the conditions for reimbursement of expenditure to the beneficiary have been met;
(b)
ensure, subject to the availability of funding, that a beneficiary receives the amount due in full and no later than 80 days from the date of submission of the payment claim by the beneficiary; the deadline may be interrupted if information submitted by the beneficiary does not allow the managing authority to establish whether the amount is due;
(c)
have effective and proportionate anti-fraud measures and procedures in place, taking into account the risks identified;
(d)
prevent, detect and correct irregularities;
(e)
confirm that the expenditure entered into the accounts is legal and regular;
(f)
draw up the management declaration in accordance with the template set out in Annex XVIII.
For point (b) of the first subparagraph, no amount shall be deducted or withheld and no specific charge or other charge with equivalent effect shall be levied that would reduce amounts due to beneficiaries.
For PPP operations, the managing authority shall make payments to an escrow account set up for that purpose in the name of the beneficiary for use in accordance with the PPP agreement.
2.   Management verifications referred to in point (a) of the first subparagraph of paragraph 1 shall be risk-based and proportionate to the risks identified ex ante and in writing.
Management verifications shall include administrative verifications in respect of payment claims made by beneficiaries and on-the-spot verifications of operations. Those verifications shall be carried out before submission of the accounts in accordance with Article 98.
3.   Where the managing authority is also a beneficiary under the programme, arrangements for the management verifications shall ensure separation of functions.
Without prejudice to paragraph 2, the Interreg Regulation may establish specific rules on management verifications applicable to Interreg programmes. The AMIF, the ISF and the BMVI Regulations may establish specific rules on management verifications that are applicable where an international organisation is a beneficiary.
