Article 91
Payment applications
1.   The Member State shall submit a maximum of six payment applications per programme, per Fund and per accounting year. Every year, one payment application may be submitted at any time in each time period between the following dates: 28 February, 31 May, 31 July, 31 October, 30 November and 31 December.
The last payment application submitted by 31 July shall be deemed to be the final payment application for the accounting year that has ended 30 June.
The first subparagraph shall not apply to Interreg programmes.
2.   Payment applications shall be admissible only where the latest assurance package due, as referred to in Article 98, has been submitted.
3.   Payment applications shall be submitted to the Commission in accordance with the template set out in Annex XXIII and include, for each priority and, where applicable, by category of region:
(a)
the total amount of eligible expenditure incurred by beneficiaries and paid in implementing operations linked to specific objectives for which enabling conditions are fulfilled and operations linked to specific objectives for which enabling conditions are not fulfilled but contribute to the fulfilment of enabling conditions, as entered in the system of the body carrying out the accounting function;
(b)
the amount for technical assistance calculated in accordance with point (b) of Article 36(5), where applicable;
(c)
the total amount of public contribution made or to be made linked to specific objectives for which enabling conditions are fulfilled and operations linked to specific objectives for which enabling conditions are not fulfilled but contribute to the fulfilment of enabling conditions, as entered in the system of the body carrying out the accounting function;
(d)
the total amount of eligible expenditure incurred by beneficiaries and paid in implementing operations linked to specific objectives for which enabling conditions are not fulfilled, with the exception of operations that contribute to the fulfilment of enabling conditions, as entered in the system of the body carrying out the accounting function.
4.   By way of derogation from point (a) of paragraph 3, the following shall apply:
(a)
where the Union contribution is made pursuant to point (a) of Article 51, the amounts included in a payment application are the amounts justified by the progress in the fulfilment of conditions, or achievement of results, in accordance with the decision referred to in Article 95(2) or the delegated act referred to in Article 95(4);
(b)
where the Union contribution is made pursuant to points (c), (d) and (e) of Article 51, the amounts included in a payment application are the amounts determined in accordance with the decision referred to in Article 94(3) or the delegated act referred to in Article 94(4);
(c)
for the forms of grants listed in points (b), (c) and (d) of the first subparagraph of Article 53(1), the amounts included in a payment application are the costs calculated on the applicable basis.
5.   By way of derogation from paragraph 3, in the case of State aid, the payment application may include advances paid to the beneficiary by the body granting the aid under the following cumulative conditions:
(a)
those advances are subject to a guarantee provided by a bank or other financial institution established in the Member State or be covered by a facility provided as a guarantee by a public entity or by the Member State;
(b)
those advances do not exceed 40 % of the total amount of the aid to be granted to a beneficiary for a given operation;
(c)
those advances are covered by expenditure paid by beneficiaries in implementing the operation and supported by receipted invoices or accounting documents of equivalent probative value at the latest within 3 years following the year of the payment of the advance or on 31 December 2029, whichever is earlier, failing which the next payment application shall be corrected accordingly.
Each payment application which includes advances of this type shall separately disclose the total amount paid from the programme as advances, the amount which has been covered by expenditure paid by beneficiaries within 3 years of the payment of the advance in accordance with point (c), and the amount which has not been covered by expenditure paid by beneficiaries and for which the 3-year period has not yet elapsed.
6.   By way of derogation from point (c) of paragraph 3 of this Article, in the case of aid schemes under Article 107 TFEU, the public contribution corresponding to the expenditure included in a payment application shall have been paid to the beneficiaries by the body granting the aid.
