Article 79
Audits of operations
1.   Audits of operations shall cover expenditure declared to the Commission in the accounting year on the basis of a sample. That sample shall be representative and based on statistical sampling methods.
2.   Where the population consists of less than 300 sampling units, a non-statistical sampling method may be used on the professional judgement of the audit authority. In such cases, the size of the sample shall be sufficient to enable the audit authority to draw up a valid audit opinion. The non-statistical sampling method shall cover a minimum of 10 % of the sampling units in the population of the accounting year, selected randomly.
The statistical sample may cover one or more programmes receiving support from the ERDF, the ESF+, the Cohesion Fund and the JTF and, subject to stratification where appropriate, one or more programming periods according to the professional judgement of the audit authority.
The sample of operations supported by the EMFAF, the AMIF, the ISF and the BMVI shall cover operations supported by each Fund separately.
3.   Audits of operations shall include on-the-spot verification of the physical implementation of the operation only where it is required by the type of operation concerned.
The ESF+ Regulation may set out specific provisions for programmes or priorities under point (m) of Article 4(1) of that Regulation. The AMIF, the ISF and the BMVI Regulations may establish specific provisions for audit of operations where an international organisation is a beneficiary. The Interreg Regulation may establish specific rules on audits of operations applicable to Interreg programmes.
Audits shall be conducted on the basis of the rules in force at the time when the activities within the operation were carried out.
4.   The Commission is empowered to adopt a delegated act in accordance with Article 114 to supplement this Article by setting out standardised off-the-shelf sampling methodologies and modalities to cover one or more programming periods.
