Article 102
Contradictory procedure for the examination of accounts
1.   If the audit authority provides an audit opinion which is qualified or adverse due to reasons linked to the completeness, accuracy and veracity of the accounts, the Commission shall request the Member State to revise these accounts and to resubmit the documents referred to in Article 98(1) within 1 month.
Where by the time limit set out in the first subparagraph:
(a)
the audit opinion is unqualified, Article 100 shall apply and the Commission shall pay any additional amount due or proceed to a recovery within 2 months;
(b)
the audit opinion is still qualified or documents have not been re-submitted by the Member State, paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 shall apply.
2.   If the audit opinion remains qualified due to reasons linked to the completeness, accuracy and veracity of the accounts or if the audit opinion remains unreliable, the Commission shall inform the Member State on the amount chargeable to the Funds for the accounting year.
3.   Where the Member State agrees with the amount referred to in paragraph 2 of this Artcile within 1 month, the Commission shall pay within 2 months any additional amount due or proceed to a recovery in accordance with Article 100.
4.   Where the Member State does not agree with the amount referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article, the Commission shall establish the amount chargeable to the Funds for the accounting year. Such an act shall not constitute a financial correction and shall not reduce support from the Funds to the programme. The Commission shall pay within 2 months any additional amount due or proceed to a recovery in accordance with Article 100.
5.   With regard to the final accounting year, the Commission shall pay or recover the annual balance of the accounts for programmes supported by the ERDF, the ESF+, the Cohesion Fund, the JTF and the EMFAF no later than 2 months after the date of acceptance of the final performance report as referred to in Article 43.
