Article 59
Implementation of financial instruments
1.   Financial instruments implemented directly by the managing authority may only provide loans or guarantees. The managing authority shall set out the terms and conditions of the programme contribution to the financial instrument in a strategy document which shall include the elements set out in Annex X.
2.   Financial instruments implemented under the responsibility of the managing authority may be either of the following:
(a)
an investment of programme resources into the capital of a legal entity;
(b)
separate blocks of finance or fiduciary accounts.
The managing authority shall select the body implementing a financial instrument.
3.   The managing authority may directly award a contract for the implementation of a financial instrument to:
(a)
the EIB;
(b)
international financial institutions in which a Member State is a shareholder;
(c)
a publicly-owned bank or institution, established as a legal entity carrying out financial activities on a professional basis, which fulfils all of the following conditions:
(i)
there is no direct private capital participation, with the exception of non-controlling and non-blocking forms of private capital participation required by national legislative provisions, in conformity with the Treaties, which do not exert a decisive influence on the relevant bank or institution, and with the exception of forms of private capital participation which confer no influence on decisions regarding the day-to-day management of the financial instrument supported by the Funds;
(ii)
operates under a public policy mandate given by the relevant authority of a Member State at national or regional level, which includes carrying out, as all or part of its activities, economic development activities contributing to the objectives of the Funds;
(iii)
carries out, as all or part of its activities, economic development activities contributing to the objectives of the Funds in regions, policy areas or sectors for which access to funding from market sources is not generally available or sufficient;
(iv)
operates without primarily focusing on maximising profits, but ensures a long-term financial sustainability for its activities;
(v)
ensures that the direct award of a contract referred to in point (b) does not provide any direct or indirect benefit for commercial activities by way of appropriate measures in accordance with applicable law;
(vi)
is subject to the supervision of an independent authority in accordance with applicable law,
(d)
other bodies, also entering under the scope of Article 12 of Directive 2014/24/EU.
4.   When the body selected by the managing authority implements a holding fund, that body may further select other bodies to implement specific funds.
5.   The terms and conditions of programme contributions to financial instruments implemented in accordance with paragraph 2, shall be set out in funding agreements between:
(a)
the duly mandated representatives of the managing authority and the body implementing a holding fund, where applicable;
(b)
the duly mandated representatives of the managing authority, or, where applicable, the body implementing a holding fund and the body implementing a specific fund.
Those funding agreements shall include all the elements set out in Annex X.
6.   The financial liability of the managing authority shall not exceed the amount committed by the managing authority to the financial instrument under the relevant funding agreements.
7.   The bodies implementing the financial instruments concerned, or in the context of guarantees, the body providing the underlying loans, shall support final recipients, taking due account of the programme objectives and the potential for the financial viability of the investment as justified in the business plan or an equivalent document. The selection of final recipients shall be transparent and shall not give rise to a conflict of interest.
8.   National co-financing of a programme may be provided either by the managing authority or at the level of holding funds, or at the level of specific funds, or at the level of investments in final recipients, in accordance with the Fund-specific rules. When the national co-financing is provided at the level of investments in final recipients, the body implementing financial instruments shall keep documentary evidence demonstrating the eligibility of the underlying expenditure.
9.   The managing authority implementing directly the financial instrument pursuant to paragraph 1 of this Article, or the body implementing the financial instrument pursuant to paragraph 2 of this Article, shall keep separate accounts or maintain an accounting code for each priority or, for the EMFAF, each specific objective and, where applicable, each category of region for each programme contribution, and separately for resources referred to in Articles 60 and 62, respectively.
