Article 77
Functions of the audit authority
1.   The audit authority shall be responsible for carrying out system audits, audits on operations and audits of accounts in order to provide independent assurance to the Commission regarding the effective functioning of the management and control systems and the legality and regularity of the expenditure included in the accounts submitted to the Commission.
2.   Audit work shall be carried out in accordance with internationally accepted audit standards.
3.   The audit authority shall draw up and submit to the Commission:
(a)
an annual audit opinion in accordance with Article 63(7) of the Financial Regulation and with the template set out in Annex XIX to this Regulation and, based on all audit work carried out, cover the following distinct components:
(i)
the completeness, accuracy and veracity of the accounts;
(ii)
the legality and regularity of the expenditure included in the accounts submitted to the Commission;
(iii)
the effective functioning of the management and control system;
(b)
an annual control report fulfilling the requirements of point (b) of Article 63(5) of the Financial Regulation, in accordance with the template set out in Annex XX to this Regulation, which supports the annual audit opinion referred to in point (a) of this paragraph and sets out a summary of findings, including an analysis of the nature and extent of errors and deficiencies in the systems as well as the proposed and implemented corrective actions and the resulting total error rate and residual error rate for the expenditure entered in the accounts submitted to the Commission.
4.   Where programmes are grouped for the purpose of audits of operations pursuant to the second subparagraph of Article 79(2), the information required under point (b) of paragraph 3 of this Article may be grouped in a single report.
5.   The audit authority shall transmit to the Commission system audit reports as soon as the contradictory procedure with the relevant auditees is concluded.
6.   The Commission and the audit authorities shall meet on a regular basis and, unless otherwise agreed, at least once a year to examine the audit strategy, the annual control report and the audit opinion, to coordinate their audit plans and methods, and to exchange views on issues relating to the improvement of management and control systems.
