Article 68
Specific eligibility rules for financial instruments
1.   Eligible expenditure of a financial instrument shall be the total amount of programme contribution paid to, or, in the case of guarantees, set aside for guarantee contracts, by the financial instrument within the eligibility period, where that amount corresponds to:
(a)
payments to final recipients, in the case of loans, equity and quasi-equity investments;
(b)
resources set aside for guarantee contracts, whether outstanding or having already come to maturity, in order to honour possible guarantee calls for losses, calculated based on a multiplier ratio established for the respective underlying disbursed new loans, equity or quasi-equity investments in final recipients;
(c)
payments to, or for the benefit of, final recipients where financial instruments are combined with other Union contribution in a single financial instrument operation in accordance with Article 58(5);
(d)
payments of management fees and reimbursements of management costs incurred by the bodies implementing the financial instrument.
2.   Where a financial instrument is implemented across consecutive programming periods, support may be provided to, or for the benefit of, final recipients, including management costs and fees, based on agreements made under the previous programming period, provided that such support complies with the eligibility rules of the subsequent programming period. In such cases, the eligibility of expenditure submitted in payment applications shall be determined in accordance with the rules of the respective programming period.
3.   For point (b) of paragraph 1, if the entity benefiting from the guarantees has not disbursed the planned amount of new loans, equity or quasi-equity investments to final recipients in accordance with the multiplier ratio, the eligible expenditure shall be reduced proportionally. The multiplier ratio may be reviewed, where justified by subsequent changes in market conditions. Such a review shall not have retroactive effect.
4.   For point (d) of paragraph 1, management fees shall be performance based.
Where bodies implementing a holding fund are selected through a direct award of contract pursuant to Article 59(3), the amount of management costs and fees paid to those bodies that can be declared as eligible expenditure shall be subject to a threshold of up to 5 % of the total amount of programme contributions disbursed to final recipients in loans or set aside for guarantee contracts and up to 7 % of the total amount of programme contributions disbursed to final recipients in equity and quasi-equity investments.
Where bodies implementing a specific fund are selected through a direct award of contract pursuant to Article 59(3), the amount of management costs and fees paid to those bodies that can be declared as eligible expenditure shall be subject to a threshold of up to 7 % of the total amount of programme contributions disbursed to final recipients in loans or set aside for in guarantee contracts and up to 15 % of the total amount of programme contributions disbursed to final recipients in equity or quasi-equity investments.
Where bodies implementing a holding fund or specific funds, or both, are selected through a competitive tender in accordance with the applicable law, the amount of management costs and fees shall be established in the funding agreement and shall reflect the result of the competitive tender.
5.   Where arrangement fees, or any part thereof, are charged to final recipients, they shall not be declared as eligible expenditure.
6.   The eligible expenditure declared in accordance with paragraph 1 shall not exceed the sum of the total amount of support from the Funds paid for the purposes of that paragraph and the corresponding national co-financing.
