Article 69
Responsibilities of Member States
1.   Member States shall have management and control systems for their programmes in accordance with this Title and ensure their functioning in accordance with the principle of sound financial management and the key requirements listed in Annex XI.
2.   Member States shall ensure the legality and regularity of expenditure included in the accounts submitted to the Commission and shall take all required actions to prevent, detect and correct and report on irregularities including fraud. Those actions comprise the collection of information on the beneficial owners of the recipients of Union funding in accordance with Annex XVII. The rules related to the collection and processing of such data shall comply with applicable data protection rules. The Commission, the European Anti-Fraud Office and the Court of Auditors shall have the necessary access to that information.
For programmes supported by the AMIF, the ISF and the BMVI, the obligations concerning the collection of information on the beneficial owners of the recipients of Union funding in accordance with Annex XVII as set out in the first subparagraph shall apply as from 1 January 2023.
3.   Member States shall, upon request of the Commission, take the actions necessary to ensure the effective functioning of their management and control systems and the legality and regularity of expenditure submitted to the Commission. Where that action is an audit, the Commission officials or their authorised representatives may take part.
4.   Member States shall ensure the quality, accuracy and reliability of the monitoring system and of data on indicators.
5.   Member States shall ensure the publication of information in accordance with the requirements established in this Regulation and in the Fund-specific Regulations, except where Union law or national law excludes such publication for reasons of security, public order, criminal investigations, or protection of personal data in accordance with Regulation (EU) 2016/679.
6.   Member States shall have systems and procedures to ensure that all documents required for the audit trail as set out in Annex XIII are kept in accordance with the requirements set out in Article 82.
7.   Member States shall make arrangements to ensure the effective examination of complaints concerning the Funds. The scope, rules and procedures concerning those arrangements shall be the responsibility of Member States in accordance with their institutional and legal framework. This is without prejudice to the general possibility to address complaints to the Commission by citizens and stakeholders. Member States shall, upon request by the Commission, examine complaints submitted to the Commission falling within the scope of their programmes and shall inform the Commission of the results of these examinations.
For the purposes of this Article, complaints cover any dispute between potential and selected beneficiaries with regard to the proposed or selected operation and any disputes with third parties on the implementation of the programme or operations thereunder, irrespective of the qualification of means of legal redress established under national law.
8.   Member States shall ensure that all exchanges of information between beneficiaries and the programme authorities are carried out by means of electronic data exchange systems in accordance with Annex XIV.
Member States shall promote the benefits of electronic data exchange and provide all necessary support to beneficiaries in this respect.
By way of derogation from the first subparagraph, the managing authority may exceptionally accept, upon the explicit request of a beneficiary, the exchanges of information in paper format, without prejudice to its obligation to record and store data in accordance with point (e) of Article 72(1).
For programmes supported by the EMFAF, the AMIF, the ISF and the BMVI, the first subparagraph shall apply as from 1 January 2023.
The first subparagraph shall not apply to programmes or priorities under point (m) of Article 4(1) of the ESF+ Regulation.
9.   Member States shall ensure that all official exchanges of information with the Commission are carried out by means of an electronic data exchange system in accordance with Annex XV.
10.   The Member State shall provide, or shall ensure that the managing authorities provide, forecasts of the amount for payment applications to be submitted for the current and subsequent calendar year by 31 January and 31 July, in accordance with Annex VIII.
11.   Each Member State shall have in place, at the latest by the time of submission of the final payment application for the first accounting year and no later than 30 June 2023, a description of the management and control system in accordance with the template set out in Annex XVI. It shall keep that description updated to reflect any subsequent modifications.
12.   Member States shall report on irregularities in accordance with the criteria for determining the cases of irregularity to be reported, the data to be provided and the format for reporting set out in Annex XII.
