Article 42
Transmission of data
1.   The Member State or the managing authority shall electronically transmit to the Commission cumulative data for each programme by 31 January, 30 April, 31 July, 30 September and 30 November of each year, with the exception of the data required in point (b) of paragraph 2 and in paragraph 3 that shall be electronically transmitted by 31 January and 31 July of each year, in accordance with the template set out in Annex VII.
The first transmission shall be due by 31 January 2022 and the last one by 31 January 2030.
For priorities supporting the specific objective set out in point (m) of Article 4(1) of the ESF+ Regulation, data shall be transmitted annually by 31 January.
The ESF+ Regulation may determine specific rules for the frequency of collecting and transmitting longer-term result indicators.
2.   The data shall be broken down for each priority by specific objective and, where applicable, by category of region and shall refer to:
(a)
the number of selected operations, their total eligible cost, the contribution from the Funds and the total eligible expenditure declared by the beneficiaries to the managing authority, all broken down by type of intervention;
(b)
the values of output and result indicators for selected operations and values achieved by operations.
3.   For financial instruments data shall also be provided on the following:
(a)
eligible expenditure by type of financial product;
(b)
amount of management costs and fees declared as eligible expenditure;
(c)
the amount, by type of financial product, of private and public resources mobilised in addition to the Funds;
(d)
interest and other gains generated by support from the Funds to financial instruments referred to in Article 60 and resources returned attributable to support from the Funds as referred to in Article 62;
(e)
total value of loans, equity or quasi-equity investments in final recipients which were guaranteed with programme resources and which were actually disbursed to final recipients.
4.   The data submitted in accordance with this Article shall be reliable and reflect the data stored electronically as referred to in point (e) of Article 72(1) as at the end of the month preceding the month of submission.
5.   The Member State or the managing authority shall publish or provide a link to all the data transmitted to the Commission on the website portal referred to in point (b) of Article 46 or on the website referred to in Article 49(1).
