Article 20
Temporary measures for the use of the Funds in response to exceptional or unusual circumstances
1.   Where after 1 July 2021 the Council has recognised the occurrence of an unusual event outside the control of one or more Member States, which has a major impact on the financial position of the general government or a severe economic downturn for the euro area or the Union as a whole as referred to in the tenth subparagraph of Article 5(1), the fourth subparagraph of Article 6(3), the tenth subparagraph of Article 9(1) and the fourth subparagraph of Article 10(3) of Regulation (EC) No 1466/97 (45) or the occurrence of unexpected adverse economic events with major unfavourable consequences for government finances as referred to in Articles 3(5) and 5(2) of Regulation (EC) No 1467/97, the Commission may, by means of an implementing decision and for a period of a maximum of 18 months, adopt one or more of the following measures provided that they are strictly necessary to respond to such exceptional or unusual circumstances:
(a)
on request of one or more Member States concerned, increase interim payments by 10 percentage points above the co-financing rate applicable, not exceeding 100 %, by way of derogation from Article 112(3) and (4) of this Regulation, as well as from Article 40 of the EMFAF Regulation, Article 15 of the AMIF Regulation, Article 12 of the ISF Regulation and Article 12 of the BMVI Regulation;
(b)
allow the authorities of a Member State to select for support operations that have been physically completed or fully implemented before the application for the funding under the programme is duly submitted to the managing authority, by way of derogation from Article 63(6), provided that the operation is in response to the exceptional circumstances;
(c)
provide that expenditure for operations in response to such circumstances may be eligible from the date on which the Council endorsed the occurrence of those circumstances, by way of derogation from Article 63(7);
(d)
extend the deadlines for the submission of documents and the submission of data to the Commission by up to 3 months, by way of derogation from Articles 41(6), 42(1), 44(2) and the first subparagraph of Article 49(3).
2.   The Commission shall keep the European Parliament and the Council informed of the implementation of this Article. When one of the conditions set out in paragraph 1 is fulfilled, the Commission shall immediately inform the European Parliament and the Council on its assessment of the situation and its envisaged follow-up.
3.   The European Parliament or the Council may invite the Commission for a structured dialogue on the application of this Article. When assessing the situation and envisaging a follow-up, the Commission shall give due consideration to the positions taken and views expressed through the structured dialogue.
4.   If after the period not exceeding 18 months, as referred to in paragraph 1, the specific circumstances that led to the adoption of these temporary measures persist, the Commission shall reassess the situation and put forward a legislative proposal, as appropriate, amending this Regulation, providing for the necessary flexibility to address these circumstances.
5.   The Commission shall inform the European Parliament and the Council of the implementing decision adopted under paragraph 1 without delay, at the latest within 2 working days of its adoption.
