Article 40
Functions of the monitoring committee
1.   The monitoring committee shall examine:
(a)
the progress in programme implementation and in achieving the milestones and targets;
(b)
any issues that affect the performance of the programme and the measures taken to address those issues;
(c)
the contribution of the programme to tackling the challenges identified in the relevant country-specific recommendations that are linked to the implementation of the programme;
(d)
the elements of the ex ante assessment listed in Article 58(3) and the strategy document referred to in Article 59(1);
(e)
the progress made in carrying out evaluations, syntheses of evaluations and any follow-up given to findings;
(f)
the implementation of communication and visibility actions;
(g)
the progress in implementing operations of strategic importance, where relevant;
(h)
the fulfilment of enabling conditions and their application throughout the programming period;
(i)
the progress in administrative capacity building for public institutions, partners and beneficiaries, where relevant.
(j)
information regarding the implementation of the contribution of the programme to the InvestEU Programme in accordance with Article 14 or of the resources transferred in accordance with Article 26, where applicable.
As regards the programmes supported by the EMFAF, the monitoring committee shall be consulted and shall, if it considers it appropriate, give an opinion on any amendment of the programme proposed by the managing authority.
2.   The monitoring committee shall approve:
(a)
the methodology and criteria used for the selection of operations, including any changes thereto, without prejudice to points (b), (c) and (d) of Article 33(3); at the request of the Commission, the methodology and criteria used for the selection of operations, including any changes thereto, shall be submitted to the Commission at least 15 working days prior to their submission to the monitoring committee.
(b)
the annual performance reports for programmes supported by the AMIF, the ISF and the BMVI, and the final performance report for programmes supported by the ERDF, the ESF+, the Cohesion Fund, the JTF and the EMFAF.
(c)
the evaluation plan and any amendment thereto;
(d)
any proposal by the managing authority for the amendment of a programme including for transfers in accordance with Article 24(5) and Article 26, with the exception of programmes supported by the EMFAF.
3.   The monitoring committee may make recommendations to the managing authority, including on measures to reduce the administrative burden for beneficiaries.
