Article 93
Common rules for payments
1.   Without prejudice to Article 15(5) and (6) and subject to available funding, the Commission shall make interim payments within 60 days of the date on which a payment application is received by the Commission.
2.   Each payment shall be attributed to the earliest open budget commitment of the Fund and category of region concerned. The Commission shall reimburse as interim payments 95 % of the amounts included in the payment application, which results from applying the co-financing rate for each priority to the total eligible expenditure or to the public contribution, as appropriate. The Commission shall determine the remaining amounts to be reimbursed or to be recovered when calculating the balance of the accounts in accordance with Article 100.
3.   The support from the Funds to a priority in interim payments shall not be higher than the amount of the support from the Funds for the priority laid down in the decision approving the programme.
4.   Where the Union contribution takes any of the forms listed in Article 51, the Commission shall not pay more than the amount requested by the Member State.
5.   The support from the Funds to a priority in the payment of the balance of the final accounting year shall not exceed any of the following amounts:
(a)
the public contribution declared in payment applications;
(b)
support from the Funds paid or to be paid to beneficiaries;
(c)
the amount requested by the Member State.
Amounts reimbursed pursuant to Article 36(5) shall not be taken into account for the purposes of calculating the ceiling set out in point (b) of the first subparagraph of this Article.
6.   On the request of a Member State, interim payments may be increased by 10 % above the co-financing rate applicable to each priority for the Funds, if a Member State meets one of the following conditions after 1 July 2021:
(a)
the Member State receives a loan from the Union pursuant to Council Regulation (EU) No 407/2010 (52);
(b)
the Member State receives medium-term financial assistance under the European Stability Mechanism as established by the Treaty establishing the European Stability Mechanism of 2 February 2012 or as referred to in Regulation (EC) No 332/2002 conditional on the implementation of a macroeconomic adjustment programme;
(c)
financial assistance is made available to the Member State conditional on the implementation of a macroeconomic adjustment programme as specified in Regulation (EU) No 472/2013.
The increased rate, which may not exceed 100 %, shall apply to requests for payments until the end of the calendar year in which the related financial assistance comes to an end.
7.   Paragraph 6 shall not apply to Interreg programmes.
