Article 80
Single audit arrangements
1.   When carrying out audits, the Commission and the audit authorities shall take due account of the principles of single audit and proportionality in relation to the level of risk to the budget of the Union. This shall be, in particular, in order to avoid duplication of audits and management verifications of the same expenditure declared to the Commission with the objective of minimising the cost of management verifications and audits and the administrative burden on beneficiaries.
The Commission and audit authorities shall first use all the information and records referred to in point (e) of Article 72(1), including results of management verifications, and only request and obtain additional documents and audit evidence from the beneficiaries concerned where, based on their professional judgement, this is required to support robust audit conclusions.
2.   For programmes for which the Commission concludes that the opinion of the audit authority is reliable and the Member State concerned participates in the enhanced cooperation on the establishment of the European Public Prosecutor’s Office, the Commission’s own audits shall be limited to auditing the work of the audit authority.
3.   Prior to the submission of the accounts for the accounting year in which the operation is completed, the Commission or audit authority shall not carry out more than one audit in respect of operations for which the total eligible expenditure does not exceed EUR 400 000 for the ERDF or the Cohesion Fund, EUR 350 000 for the JTF, EUR 300 000 for the ESF+, or EUR 200 000 for the EMFAF, the AMIF, the ISF or the BMVI.
Other operations shall not be subject to more than one audit per accounting year by either the audit authority or the Commission prior to the submission of the accounts for the accounting year in which the operation is completed. Operations shall not be subject to an audit by the Commission or the audit authority in any year where there has already been an audit in that year by the Court of Auditors, provided that the results of that Court of Auditors’ audit for such operations can be used by the audit authority or the Commission for the purpose of fulfilling their respective tasks.
4.   Notwithstanding paragraph 3, any operation may be subject to more than one audit, if the audit authority concludes, based on its professional judgement, that it is not possible to draw up a valid audit opinion.
5.   Paragraphs 2 and 3 shall not apply where:
(a)
there is a specific risk of irregularity or a suspicion of fraud;
(b)
there is a need to re-perform the work of the audit authority for obtaining assurance as to its effective functioning;
(c)
there is evidence of a serious deficiency in the work of the audit authority.
