Article 1
Objective and scope
1.   The purpose of this Regulation is to contribute to the proper functioning of the internal market by preventing unjustified geo-blocking and other forms of discrimination based, directly or indirectly, on the customers' nationality, place of residence or place of establishment, including by further clarifying certain situations where different treatment cannot be justified under Article 20(2) of Directive 2006/123/EC.
2.   This Regulation does not apply to purely internal situations, where all the relevant elements of the transaction are confined within one single Member State.
3.   This Regulation does not apply to the activities referred to in Article 2(2) of Directive 2006/123/EC.
4.   This Regulation shall be without prejudice to the rules applicable to the field of taxation.
5.   This Regulation shall not affect the rules applicable in the field of copyright and neighbouring rights, notably the rules provided for in Directive 2001/29/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (22).
6.   This Regulation shall be without prejudice to Union law concerning judicial cooperation in civil matters. Compliance with this Regulation shall not be construed as implying that a trader directs activities to the Member State of the consumer's habitual residence or domicile within the meaning of point (b) of Article 6(1) of Regulation (EC) No 593/2008 and point (c) of Article 17(1) of Regulation (EU) No 1215/2012. In particular, where a trader, acting in accordance with Articles 3, 4 and 5 of this Regulation, does not block or limit consumers' access to an online interface, does not redirect consumers to a version of an online interface based on their nationality or place of residence that is different from the online interface to which the consumers first sought access, does not apply different general conditions of access when selling goods or providing services in situations laid down in this Regulation, or accepts payment instruments issued in another Member State on a non-discriminatory basis, that trader shall not be, on those grounds alone, considered to be directing activities to the Member State where the consumer has the habitual residence or domicile. Nor shall that trader, on those grounds alone, be considered to be directing activities to the Member State of the consumer's habitual residence or domicile, where the trader provides information and assistance to the consumer after the conclusion of a contract that has resulted from the trader's compliance with this Regulation.
7.   Article 20(2) of Directive 2006/123/EC shall apply to the extent that this Regulation does not lay down more specific provisions.
