Article 4
Access to goods or services
1.   A trader shall not apply different general conditions of access to goods or services, for reasons related to a customer's nationality, place of residence or place of establishment, where the customer seeks to:
(a)
buy goods from a trader and either those goods are delivered to a location in a Member State to which the trader offers delivery in the general conditions of access or those goods are collected at a location agreed upon between the trader and the customer in a Member State in which the trader offers such an option in the general conditions of access;
(b)
receive electronically supplied services from the trader, other than services the main feature of which is the provision of access to and use of copyright protected works or other protected subject matter, including the selling of copyright protected works or protected subject matter in an intangible form;
(c)
receive services from a trader, other than electronically supplied services, in a physical location within the territory of a Member State where the trader operates.
2.   The prohibition set out in paragraph 1 shall not prevent traders from offering general conditions of access, including net sale prices, which differ between Member States or within a Member State and which are offered to customers on a specific territory or to specific groups of customers on a non-discriminatory basis.
3.   Mere compliance with the prohibition set out in paragraph 1 does not, in itself, mean that a trader is under an obligation to comply with non-contractual national legal requirements relating to the respective goods and services of the Member State of the customer or to inform customers about those requirements.
4.   The prohibition set out in point (b) of paragraph 1 shall not apply to traders that are exempted from VAT on the basis of the provisions of Chapter 1 of Title XII of Directive 2006/112/EC.
5.   The prohibition set out in paragraph 1 shall not apply in so far as a specific provision laid down in Union law, or in the laws of Member States in accordance with Union law, prevents the trader from selling the goods or providing the services to certain customers or to customers in certain territories.
With respect to the sale of books, the prohibition set out in paragraph 1 shall not prevent traders from applying different prices to customers in certain territories in so far as they are required to do so under the laws of Member States in accordance with Union law.
