Article 2
Public participation concerning plans and programmes
1. For the purposes of this Article, "the public" shall mean one or more natural or legal persons and, in accordance with national legislation or practice, their associations, organisations or groups.
2. Member States shall ensure that the public is given early and effective opportunities to participate in the preparation and modification or review of the plans or programmes required to be drawn up under the provisions listed in Annex I.
To that end, Member States shall ensure that:
(a) the public is informed, whether by public notices or other appropriate means such as electronic media where available, about any proposals for such plans or programmes or for their modification or review and that relevant information about such proposals is made available to the public including inter alia information about the right to participate in decision-making and about the competent authority to which comments or questions may be submitted;
(b) the public is entitled to express comments and opinions when all options are open before decisions on the plans and programmes are made;
(c) in making those decisions, due account shall be taken of the results of the public participation;
(d) having examined the comments and opinions expressed by the public, the competent authority makes reasonable efforts to inform the public about the decisions taken and the reasons and considerations upon which those decisions are based, including information about the public participation process.
3. Member States shall identify the public entitled to participate for the purposes of paragraph 2, including relevant non-governmental organisations meeting any requirements imposed under national law, such as those promoting environmental protection.
The detailed arrangements for public participation under this Article shall be determined by the Member States so as to enable the public to prepare and participate effectively.
Reasonable time-frames shall be provided allowing sufficient time for each of the different stages of public participation required by this Article.
4. This Article shall not apply to plans and programmes designed for the sole purpose of serving national defence or taken in case of civil emergencies.
5. This Article shall not apply to plans and programmes set out in Annex I for which a public participation procedure is carried out under Directive 2001/42/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 June 2001 on the assessment of the effects of certain plans and programmes on the environment(7) or under Directive 2000/60/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 October 2000 establishing a framework for Community action in the field of water policy(8).

