Article 4
Amendment of Directive 96/61/EC
Directive 96/61/EC is hereby amended as follows:
1. Article 2 shall be amended as follows:
(a) the following sentence shall be added to point 10(b):
"For the purposes of this definition, any change to or extension of an operation shall be deemed to be substantial if the change or extension in itself meets the thresholds, if any, set out in Annex I.";
(b) the following points shall be added:
"13. 'the public' shall mean one or more natural or legal persons and, in accordance with national legislation or practice, their associations, organisations or groups;
14. 'the public concerned' shall mean the public affected or likely to be affected by, or having an interest in, the taking of a decision on the issuing or the updating of a permit or of permit conditions; for the purposes of this definition, non-governmental organisations promoting environmental protection and meeting any requirements under national law shall be deemed to have an interest;"
2. in Article 6(1), first subparagraph, the following indent shall be added:
"- the main alternatives, if any, studied by the applicant in outline."
3. Article 15 shall be amended as follows:
(a) paragraph 1 shall be replaced by the following:
"1. Member States shall ensure that the public concerned are given early and effective opportunities to participate in the procedure for:
- issuing a permit for new installations,
- issuing a permit for any substantial change in the operation of an installation,
- updating of a permit or permit conditions for an installation in accordance with Article 13, paragraph 2, first indent.
The procedure set out in Annex V shall apply for the purposes of such participation.";
(b) the following paragraph shall be added:
"5. When a decision has been taken, the competent authority shall inform the public in accordance with the appropriate procedures and shall make available to the public the following information:
(a) the content of the decision, including a copy of the permit and of any conditions and any subsequent updates; and
(b) having examined the concerns and opinions expressed by the public concerned, the reasons and considerations on which the decision is based, including information on the public participation process.";
4. the following Article shall be inserted:
"Article 15a
Access to justice
Member States shall ensure that, in accordance with the relevant national legal system, members of the public concerned:
(a) having a sufficient interest, or alternatively,
(b) maintaining the impairment of a right, where administrative procedural law of a Member State requires this as a precondition;
have access to a review procedure before a court of law or another independent and impartial body established by law to challenge the substantive or procedural legality of decisions, acts or omissions subject to the public participation provisions of this Directive.
Member States shall determine at what stage the decisions, acts or omissions may be challenged.
What constitutes a sufficient interest and impairment of a right shall be determined by the Member States, consistently with the objective of giving the public concerned wide access to justice. To this end, the interest of any non-governmental organisation meeting the requirements referred to in Article 2(14) shall be deemed sufficient for the purpose of subparagraph (a) of this Article. Such organisations shall also be deemed to have rights capable of being impaired for the purpose of subparagraph (b) of this Article.
The provisions of this Article shall not exclude the possibility of a preliminary review procedure before an administrative authority and shall not affect the requirement of exhaustion of administrative review procedures prior to recourse to judicial review procedures, where such a requirement exists under national law.
Any such procedure shall be fair, equitable, timely and not prohibitively expensive.
In order to further the effectiveness of the provisions of this Article, Member States shall ensure that practical information is made available to the public on access to administrative and judicial review procedures.";
5. Article 17 shall be amended as follows:
(a) paragraph 1 shall be replaced by the following:
"1. Where a Member State is aware that the operation of an installation is likely to have significant negative effects on the environment of another Member State, or where a Member State likely to be significantly affected so requests, the Member State in whose territory the application for a permit pursuant to Article 4 or Article 12(2) was submitted shall forward to the other Member State any information required to be given or made available pursuant to Annex V at the same time as it makes it available to its own nationals. Such information shall serve as a basis for any consultations necessary in the framework of the bilateral relations between the two Member States on a reciprocal and equivalent basis.";
(b) the following paragraphs shall be added:
"3. The results of any consultations pursuant to paragraphs 1 and 2 must be taken into consideration when the competent authority reaches a decision on the application.
4. The competent authority shall inform any Member State, which has been consulted pursuant to paragraph 1, of the decision reached on the application and shall forward to it the information referred to in Article 15(5). That Member State shall take the measures necessary to ensure that that information is made available in an appropriate manner to the public concerned in its own territory.";
6. an Annex V shall be added, as set out in Annex II to this Directive.

