Article 72
Shipment of waste batteries
1.   Treatment may be undertaken outside the Member State concerned or outside the Union, provided that the shipment of waste batteries or fractions thereof, is in compliance with Regulations (EC) No 1013/2006 and (EC) No 1418/2007.
2.   In order to distinguish between used batteries and waste batteries, the competent authorities of Member States may inspect shipments of used batteries suspected to be waste batteries for compliance with the minimum requirements set out in Annex XIV and monitor such shipments accordingly.
Where the competent authorities in a Member State establish that an intended shipment of used batteries consists of waste batteries, the costs of appropriate analyses, inspections and storage of the used batteries suspected to be waste may be charged to the producers of the relevant category of batteries, to third parties acting on their behalf or to other persons arranging the shipment. The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 89, supplementing the minimum requirements set out in Annex XIV, in particular on the state of health, to distinguish between the shipment of used batteries and waste batteries.
3.   Waste batteries or fractions thereof exported from the Union in accordance with paragraph 1 of this Article shall only count towards the fulfilment of obligations, efficiencies and targets laid down in Articles 70 and 71 if the exporter of the waste batteries or fractions thereof provides documentary evidence approved by the competent authority of destination that the treatment took place in conditions that are equivalent to those required by this Regulation and in accordance with other Union law regarding human health and environmental protection.
4.   The Commission is empowered to adopt a delegated act in accordance with Article 89, to lay down detailed rules supplementing those in paragraph 3 of this Article, by laying down the criteria for the assessment of equivalent conditions.
