Article 56
Extended Producer Responsibility
1.   Producers shall have extended producer responsibility for batteries that they make available on the market for the first time within the territory of a Member State. Such producers shall comply with the requirements of Articles 8 and 8a of Directive 2008/98/EC and of this Chapter.
2.   An economic operator that makes available on the market for the first time within the territory of a Member State a battery that results from preparation for re-use, preparation for repurposing, repurposing or remanufacturing operations shall be considered to be the producer of such battery for the purposes of this Regulation and shall have extended producer responsibility.
3.   A producer as defined in Article 3, point (47)(d) shall appoint an authorised representative for extended producer responsibility in each Member State in which it sells batteries. Such appointment shall be made by written mandate.
4.   The financial contributions to be paid by the producer shall cover the following costs for the products that the producer makes available on the market in the Member State concerned:
(a)
costs of separate collection of waste batteries and their subsequent transport and treatment, taking into account any revenues obtained from preparation for re-use or preparation for repurposing or from the value of secondary raw materials recovered from recycled waste batteries;
(b)
costs of carrying out a compositional survey of collected mixed municipal waste in accordance with Article 69(5);
(c)
costs of providing information on prevention and management of waste batteries in accordance with Article 74;
(d)
costs of data gathering and reporting to the competent authorities in accordance with Article 75.
5.   In the case of making available batteries that have been subject to preparation for re-use, preparation for repurposing, repurposing or remanufacturing, both the producers of the original batteries and the producers of the batteries that are placed on the market as a result of those operations, may establish and adjust a cost sharing mechanism, based on the actual attribution of costs between the different producers, for the costs referred to in paragraph 4, points (a), (c) and (d).
Where a battery referred to in paragraph 2 is subject to more than one extended producer responsibility, the first producer making that battery available on the market shall not bear additional costs as a result of the cost sharing mechanism referred to in the first subparagraph.
The Commission shall facilitate the exchange of information and sharing of best practices among Member States regarding such cost sharing mechanisms.
