Article 94
Review
1.   By 30 June 2031, the Commission shall review and draw up a report on the application of this Regulation and its impact on the environment, human health and the functioning of the internal market and submit it to the European Parliament and to the Council.
2.   Taking account of technical progress and practical experience gained in Member States, the Commission shall, in its report, include an evaluation on the following aspects of this Regulation:
(a)
the list of common formats falling under the definition of portable batteries of general use;
(b)
the sustainability and safety requirements laid down in Chapter II, including the possible need to introduce an export ban on batteries which are non-compliant with the restrictions set out in Annex I;
(c)
the labelling and information requirements laid down in Chapter III;
(d)
the battery due diligence requirements laid down in Articles 48 to 53;
(e)
the measures regarding management of waste batteries laid down in Chapter VIII, including the possibility of introducing two sub-categories of portable batteries namely rechargeable and non-rechargeable portable batteries, with separate collection targets, and of introducing a separate collection target for portable batteries of general use;
(f)
the measures regarding the battery passport set out in Chapter IX;
(g)
infringements and the effectiveness, proportionality and dissuasiveness of penalties as set out in Article 93;
(h)
analysis of the impact of this Regulation on the competitiveness of, and on the investments in, the batteries sector, and of the administrative burden resulting from this Regulation.
Where appropriate, the report referred to in paragraph 1 shall be accompanied by a legislative proposal for amendment of the relevant provisions of this Regulation.
3.   Taking into account the revision of Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006, the Commission shall in its report include a specific evaluation of the need for a legislative proposal to amend Articles 6, 86, 87 and 88 of this Regulation.
4.   The Commission shall assess whether any amendment to Chapter VII is necessary in the light of the adoption, if any, of Union legislative acts laying down rules on sustainable corporate governance and due diligence, including obligations for companies regarding human rights adverse impacts and environmental adverse impacts in relation to their own operations, the operations of their subsidiaries and branches, and their value chain operations.
The Commission shall publish a report containing the results of such assessment by 12 months after the date of entry into force of any of the legislative acts referred to in the first subparagraph, or by 30 June 2031, whichever is the earliest. Where appropriate, the Commission shall accompany its report with a legislative proposal amending Chapter VII.
5.   By 30 June 2031, the Commission shall submit a report to the European Parliament and the Council assessing the feasibility and the technical consequences of extending the scope of the definition of ‘LMT battery’ in Article 3, point (11), in particular by including batteries powering non-wheeled vehicles. The report shall be accompanied, where appropriate, by a legislative proposal.
6.   By 1 January 2025, the Commission shall assess how best to introduce harmonised standards for a common charger for, respectively, rechargeable batteries designed for light means of transport, as well as for rechargeable batteries incorporated into specific categories of electrical and electronic equipment covered by Directive 2012/19/EU. Charging devices for categories and classes of radio equipment under Article 3(4) of Directive 2014/53/EU shall be excluded from the scope of that assessment.
