Article 87
Opinion of the Agency’s Committees
1.   Within 12 months of the date of publication referred to in Article 86(9), the Committee for Risk Assessment shall adopt an opinion as to whether the suggested restrictions are appropriate in reducing the risk to human health or the environment, based on its consideration of the relevant parts of the restriction dossier. This opinion shall take account of the restriction dossier prepared by the Agency at the request of the Commission or by the Member State, and the views of interested parties referred to in Article 86(9), point (a).
2.   Within 15 months of the date of publication referred to in Article 86(9), the Committee for Socioeconomic Analysis shall adopt an opinion on the suggested restrictions, based on its consideration of the relevant parts of the restriction dossier and the socioeconomic impact. Prior to that, it shall prepare a draft opinion on the suggested restrictions and on the related socioeconomic impact, taking account of the analyses or information according to Article 86(9), point (b), if there are any.
3.   The Agency shall publish the draft opinion of the Committee for Socioeconomic Analysis on its website without delay and invite interested parties to provide their comments on the draft opinion no later than 60 days from the publication of that draft opinion.
4.   The Committee for Socioeconomic Analysis shall without delay adopt its opinion, taking into account where appropriate further comments received by the deadline set in paragraph 3 of this Article. That opinion shall take account of the comments of interested parties submitted under Article 86(9), point (b), and paragraph 3 of this Article.
5.   Where the opinion of the Committee for Risk Assessment diverges significantly from the restrictions suggested in the restriction dossier, the Agency shall postpone the deadline for the opinion of the Committee for Socioeconomic Analysis by a maximum of 90 days.
6.   Where the Committees for Risk Assessment and Socioeconomic Analysis provide an opinion pursuant to paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article, they shall make use of rapporteurs under Article 87 of Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 and in line with the conditions provided therein.
