Article 9
Performance and durability requirements for portable batteries of general use
1.   From 18 August 2028 or 24 months after the date of entry into force of the delegated act referred to in paragraph 2, whichever is the latest, portable batteries of general use, excluding button cells, shall meet the minimum values for the electrochemical performance and durability parameters set out in Annex III as laid down in the delegated act adopted pursuant to paragraph 2.
2.   By 18 August 2027, the Commission shall adopt a delegated act in accordance with Article 89 to supplement this Regulation by establishing mandatory minimum values for the electrochemical performance and durability parameters set out in Annex III for portable batteries of general use, excluding button cells.
The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 89 to amend the minimum values referred to in the first subparagraph or add electrochemical performance and durability parameters to those set out in Annex III in view of technical and scientific progress.
In preparing the delegated act referred to in the first subparagraph, the Commission shall consider the need to reduce the life cycle environmental impact of portable batteries of general use, including by means of increasing the resource efficiency thereof, and shall take into consideration relevant international standards and labelling schemes.
The Commission shall also ensure that the provisions laid down by the delegated act referred to in the first subparagraph do not have a significant adverse impact on the safety and functionality of those batteries or the appliances, light means of transport or other vehicles into which those batteries are incorporated, the affordability and the cost for end-users and the industry’s competitiveness.
3.   By 31 December 2030, the Commission shall assess the feasibility of measures to phase out non-rechargeable portable batteries of general use with a view to minimising their environmental impact based on the life cycle assessment methodology and viable alternatives for end-users. To that end, the Commission shall submit a report to the European Parliament and to the Council and consider taking the appropriate measures, including the adoption of legislative proposals for either the phase out or the setting of eco-design requirements.
