Article 59
Collection of waste portable batteries
1.   Producers of portable batteries or, where appointed in accordance with Article 57(1), producer responsibility organisations, shall ensure that all waste portable batteries, regardless of their nature, chemical composition, condition, brand or origin, are collected separately in the territory of a Member State where they make portable batteries available on the market for the first time. For that purpose they shall:
(a)
establish a waste portable battery take-back and collection system;
(b)
offer the collection of waste portable batteries, free of charge, to the entities referred to in paragraph 2, point (a), and provide for the collection of waste portable batteries from all entities that have made use of that offer (‘connected collection points for waste portable batteries’);
(c)
provide for the necessary practical arrangements for collection and transport of waste portable batteries, including the provision, free of charge, of suitable collection and transport containers meeting the requirements of Directive 2008/68/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (46), to the connected collection points for waste portable batteries;
(d)
collect, free of charge, the waste portable batteries collected at the connected collection points, with a frequency that is proportionate to the area covered and the volume and hazardous nature of the waste portable batteries usually collected through the connected collection points for waste portable batteries;
(e)
collect, free of charge, the waste portable batteries removed from waste electrical and electronic equipment, with a frequency that is proportionate to the volume and hazardous nature of the waste portable batteries;
(f)
ensure that the waste portable batteries collected from the connected collection points for waste portable batteries and removed from waste electrical and electronic equipment are subsequently subject to treatment in a permitted facility by a waste management operator in accordance with Article 70.
2.   Producers of portable batteries or, where appointed in accordance with Article 57(1), producer responsibility organisations, shall ensure that the waste portable battery take-back and collection system:
(a)
consists of collection points set up by them in cooperation with one or more of the following:
(i)
distributors in accordance with Article 62;
(ii)
end-of-life vehicle treatment facilities subject to Directive 2000/53/EC;
(iii)
public authorities, or third parties carrying out waste management on their behalf, in accordance with Article 66;
(iv)
voluntary collection points in accordance with Article 67;
(v)
waste electrical and electronic equipment treatment facilities subject to Directive 2012/19/EU; and
(b)
covers the whole territory of the Member State taking into account population size and density, expected volume of waste portable batteries, accessibility for and proximity to end-users, not being limited to areas where the collection and subsequent management of waste portable batteries is profitable.
3.   Producers of portable batteries or, where appointed in accordance with Article 57(1), producer responsibility organisations, shall attain, and maintain durably, at least the following collection targets for waste portable batteries:
(a)
45 % by 31 December 2023;
(b)
63 % by 31 December 2027;
(c)
73 % by 31 December 2030.
Producers or, where appointed in accordance with Article 57(1), producer responsibility organisations, shall calculate the collection rate referred to in this paragraph in accordance with Annex XI.
4.   End-users shall be able to discard waste portable batteries at collection points referred to in paragraph 2, point (a), and shall not be charged or be obliged to buy a new battery or to have bought the portable battery from the producers who set up the collection points.
5.   Collection points set up in accordance with paragraph 2, points (a)(i), (iii) and (iv), shall not be subject to the registration or permit requirements of Directive 2008/98/EC.
6.   Member States may adopt measures to require that the collection points referred to in paragraph 2, point (a), of this Article may collect waste portable batteries only if they have concluded a contract with the producers or, where appointed in accordance with Article 57(1), producer responsibility organisations.
7.   In view of the expected development of the market and increase of the expected lifetime of rechargeable portable batteries, and in order to better ascertain the actual volume of waste portable batteries available for collection, the Commission is empowered to adopt, by 18 August 2027 delegated acts in accordance with Article 89 to amend the methodology to calculate the collection rate of portable batteries set out in Annex XI and to amend the collection target laid down in paragraph 3 of this Article to adapt that collection target to the new methodology while maintaining equivalent ambition and timelines.
