Article 71
Targets for recycling efficiency and recovery of materials
1.   Each permitted facility shall ensure that all waste batteries made available to that facility are accepted and undergo preparation for re-use, preparation for repurposing or recycling.
2.   Recyclers shall ensure that recycling achieves the targets for recycling efficiency and the targets for recovery of materials set out in Parts B and C of Annex XII respectively.
3.   The rates for recycling efficiency and recovery of materials shall be calculated in accordance with the rules laid down in a delegated act adopted pursuant to paragraph 4 of this Article.
4.   The Commission shall, by 18 February 2025, adopt a delegated act in accordance with Article 89 to supplement this Regulation by establishing the methodology for calculation and verification of rates for recycling efficiency and recovery of materials, in accordance with Part A of Annex XII, and the format for the documentation.
5.   By 18 August 2026 and at least every five years thereafter, the Commission shall assess whether, due to market developments, in particular concerning battery technologies impacting the type of materials recovered and the existing and forecasted availability of cobalt, copper, lead, lithium or nickel or the lack thereof, and in view of technical and scientific progress, it is appropriate to revise the targets for recycling efficiency and recovery of materials set out in Parts B and C of Annex XII. Where justified and appropriate on the basis of that assessment, the Commission is empowered to adopt a delegated act in accordance with Article 89 to amend the targets for recycling efficiency and recovery of materials set out in Parts B and C of Annex XII.
6.   Where appropriate due to market developments impacting the type of materials that can be recovered and in light of technical and scientific progress, including emerging new technologies in waste management, the Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 89, to amend Part C of Annex XII, by adding further materials with specific targets for recovery of material per specific material, and Part B of Annex XII, by adding further battery chemistries with specific targets for recycling efficiency.
