Article 69
Obligations for Member States regarding collection targets for waste portable batteries and waste LMT batteries
1.   Member States shall adopt the necessary measures for the achievement by producers or, where appointed in accordance with Article 57(1), producer responsibility organisations, of the collection targets laid down in Article 59(3), first subparagraph, points (a), (b) and (c), with regard to waste portable batteries, and laid down in Article 60(3), first subparagraph, points (a) and (b), with regard to waste LMT batteries.
2.   In particular, Member States shall regularly, at least once a year, monitor producers’ or, where appointed in accordance with Article 57(1), producer responsibility organisations’ collection rates to verify that they have taken adequate measures to achieve the collection targets laid down in Article 59(3), first subparagraph, points (a), (b) and (c) with regard to waste portable batteries, and laid down in Article 60(3), first subparagraph, points (a) and (b) with regard to waste LMT batteries. Such monitoring shall be based in particular on the information reported to the competent authorities in accordance with Article 75 and shall include the verification of that information, and of whether the producer has complied with the calculation methodology set out in Annex XI and the results of the compositional survey referred to in paragraph 5 of this Article and any other information available to the Member State.
3.   Where, on the basis of the monitoring referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article, a Member State finds that a producer or, where appointed in accordance with Article 57(1), a producer responsibility organisation, has not taken measures consistent with the achievement of the collection targets laid down in Article 59(3), first subparagraph, points (a), (b) and (c) with regard to waste portable batteries, or laid down in Article 60(3), first subparagraph, points (a) and (b) with regard to waste LMT batteries, the competent authority of that Member State shall request that producer or producer responsibility organisation to take appropriate corrective action ensuring that it can achieve the collection targets laid down in either of those Articles, as applicable.
4.   Without prejudice to the self-control mechanism referred to in Article 58(5), the producer or, where appointed in accordance with Article 57(1), producer responsibility organisation shall present a draft corrective action plan to the competent authority within three months of the request by the competent authority referred to in paragraph 3 of this Article. That competent authority may make observations on the draft plan, and shall communicate any such observations to the producer or the producer responsibility organisation within one month of the reception of the draft corrective action plan.
Where the competent authority communicates its observations on the draft corrective action plan, the producer or the producer responsibility organisations shall, within one month of receipt of those observations, draw up the corrective action plan, taking into account those observations, and shall implement it accordingly.
The content of the corrective action plan and the compliance with it by the producer or the producer responsibility organisation shall be taken into account when evaluating whether the conditions for the registration laid down in Article 55 and, where applicable, the authorisation laid down in Article 58 continue to be met.
5.   By 1 January 2026 and every five years thereafter, Member States shall carry out a compositional survey of collected mixed municipal waste and waste electrical and electronic equipment streams for the preceding calendar year to determine the share of waste portable batteries and waste LMT batteries therein. On the basis of those surveys, the competent authorities may require that the producers of portable batteries, producers of LMT batteries or, where appointed in accordance with Article 57(1), the respective producer responsibility organisations take corrective action to increase their network of connected collection points and carry out information campaigns in accordance with Article 74(1).
