Article 6
Restrictions on substances
1.   In addition to the restrictions set out in Annex XVII to Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 and in Article 4(2), point (a), of Directive 2000/53/EC, batteries shall not contain substances for which Annex I to this Regulation contains a restriction unless the conditions of that restriction are complied with.
2.   In the event of an unacceptable risk to human health or the environment, arising from the use of a substance in the manufacture of batteries or from the presence of a substance in the batteries when they are placed on the market, or arising during their subsequent life cycle stages, including during repurposing or the treatment of waste batteries, that is not adequately controlled and needs to be addressed on a Union-wide basis, the Commission shall adopt a delegated act in accordance with Article 89 to amend the restrictions in Annex I, pursuant to the procedure laid down in Articles 86, 87 and 88.
3.   Restrictions adopted pursuant to paragraph 2 of this Article shall not apply to the use of a substance in scientific research and development as defined in Article 3, point (23), of Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006, carried out in relation to batteries.
4.   Where a restriction adopted pursuant to paragraph 2 of this Article does not apply to product and process orientated research and development, as defined in Article 3, point (22), of Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006, that exemption, as well as the maximum quantity of the substance exempted, shall be specified in Annex I to this Regulation.
5.   By 31 December 2027, the Commission, assisted by the European Chemicals Agency set up under Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 (‘the Agency’), shall prepare a report on substances of concern, namely substances having an adverse effect on human health or the environment or hampering recycling for safe and high quality secondary raw materials, present in batteries or used in their manufacture. The Commission shall submit that report to the European Parliament and to the Council detailing its findings and shall consider the appropriate follow-up measures including the adoption of delegated acts as referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article.
