Article 79
Procedure at national level for dealing with batteries presenting a risk
1.   Without prejudice to Article 19 of Regulation (EU) 2019/1020, where the market surveillance authorities of one Member State have sufficient reason to believe that a battery covered by this Regulation presents a risk to human health or safety of persons, to property or to the environment, they shall carry out an evaluation in relation to the battery concerned covering all relevant requirements laid down in this Regulation.
Where, in the course of the evaluation referred to in the first subparagraph, the market surveillance authorities find that the battery does not comply with the requirements laid down in this Regulation (‘non-compliant battery’), they shall without delay require the relevant economic operator to take all appropriate corrective action, within a reasonable period prescribed by the market surveillance authorities and commensurate with the nature of the risk, to bring the battery into compliance with those requirements, to withdraw it from the market, or to recall it.
The market surveillance authorities shall inform the relevant notified body accordingly.
2.   The market surveillance authorities shall inform the Commission and the other Member States of the results of the evaluation and of the actions which they have required the economic operator to take.
3.   The economic operator shall ensure that all appropriate corrective action is taken in respect of all the non-compliant batteries that the economic operator has made available on the market throughout the Union.
4.   Where the relevant economic operator does not take adequate corrective action within the period referred to in paragraph 1, second subparagraph, the market surveillance authorities shall take all appropriate provisional measures to prohibit or restrict the non-compliant batteries being made available on their national market, to withdraw those batteries from that market or to recall them.
The market surveillance authorities shall inform the Commission and the other Member States, without delay, of those measures.
5.   The information referred to in paragraph 4, second subparagraph, shall include all available details, in particular the data necessary for the identification of the non-compliant battery, the origin of that battery, the nature of the non-compliance alleged and the risk involved, the nature and duration of the national measures taken and the arguments put forward by the relevant economic operator. In particular, the market surveillance authorities shall indicate whether the non-compliance is due to any of the following:
(a)
failure of the battery to be in conformity with Articles 6 to 10 or Article 12, 13 or 14;
(b)
shortcomings in the harmonised standards referred to in Article 15;
(c)
shortcomings in the common specifications referred to in Article 16.
6.   Member States other than the Member State initiating the procedure under this Article shall without delay inform the Commission and the other Member States of any measures adopted and of any additional information at their disposal relating to the non-compliance of the battery concerned, and, in the event of disagreement with the adopted national measure, of their objections.
7.   Where, within three months of receipt of the information referred to in paragraph 4, second subparagraph, no objection has been raised by either a Member State or the Commission in respect of a provisional measure taken by market surveillance authorities, that measure shall be deemed justified.
8.   Member States shall ensure that appropriate restrictive measures, such as withdrawal of the non-compliant battery from the market, are taken in respect of the non-compliant battery without delay.
