Article 81
Compliant batteries which present a risk
1.   Where, having carried out an evaluation under Article 79(1), a Member State finds that although a battery is in compliance with Articles 6 to 10 and Articles 12, 13 and 14, it presents a risk to the human health or safety of persons, to the protection of property or to the environment (‘compliant battery which presents a risk’), it shall without delay require the relevant economic operator to take all appropriate measures, within a reasonable period prescribed by the market surveillance authorities and commensurate with the nature of the risk, to ensure that the compliant battery which presents a risk, when made available on the market, no longer presents that risk, to withdraw that battery from the market or to recall it.
2.   The economic operator shall ensure that corrective action is taken in respect of all the compliant batteries which present a risk that the economic operator has made available on the market throughout the Union.
3.   The Member State shall immediately inform the Commission and the other Member States where the situation referred to in paragraph 1 occurs. That information shall include all available details, in particular the data necessary for the identification of compliant batteries which present a risk, the origin and the supply chain of such batteries, the nature of the risk involved and the nature and duration of the national measures taken.
4.   The Commission shall without delay enter into consultation with the Member States and the relevant economic operator or operators and shall evaluate the national measures taken. On the basis of the results of that evaluation, the Commission shall adopt an implementing act determining whether the national measure is justified or not and, where necessary, proposing appropriate measures. That implementing act shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 90(3).
5.   On duly justified imperative grounds of urgency relating to the protection of human health and the safety of persons, and to the protection of property or the environment, the Commission shall adopt an immediately applicable implementing act in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 90(4).
6.   The Commission shall address the implementing act referred to in paragraphs 4 and 5 to all Member States and shall immediately communicate it to them and the relevant economic operator or operators.
