Article 52
Disclosure of information on battery due diligence policies
1.   The economic operator referred to in Article 48(1) shall make available upon request to Member States’ market surveillance authorities or national authorities the verification report and approval decision issued in accordance with Article 51, the audit reports referred to in Article 48(2) and available evidence of compliance with a due diligence scheme recognised by the Commission in accordance with Article 53.
2.   The economic operator referred to in Article 48(1) shall make available to its immediate downstream purchasers all relevant information gained and maintained pursuant to its battery due diligence policy, with due regard for business confidentiality and other competitive concerns.
3.   The economic operator referred to in Article 48(1) shall on an annual basis review and make publicly available, including on the internet, a report on its battery due diligence policy. That report shall contain, in a manner that is easily comprehensible for end-users and clearly identifies the batteries concerned, the data and information on steps taken by that economic operator to comply with the requirements laid down in Articles 49 and 50, including findings of significant adverse impacts in the risk categories listed in point 2 of Annex X, and how they have been addressed, as well as a summary report of the third-party verifications carried out in accordance with Article 51, including the name of the notified body, with due regard for business confidentiality and other competitive concerns. That report shall also cover, where relevant, access to information, public participation in decision-making and access to justice in environmental matters in relation to the sourcing, processing and trading of the raw materials present in batteries.
4.   Where the economic operator referred to in Article 48(1) can demonstrate that the raw materials listed in point 1 of Annex X, that are present in the battery are derived from recycled sources, it shall publicly disclose its conclusions in reasonable detail, with due regard for business confidentiality and other competitive concerns.
