Article 10
Performance and durability requirements for rechargeable industrial batteries, LMT batteries and electric vehicle batteries
1.   From 18 August 2024, rechargeable industrial batteries with a capacity greater than 2 kWh, LMT batteries and electric vehicle batteries shall be accompanied by a document containing values for the electrochemical performance and durability parameters set out in Part A of Annex IV.
For batteries referred to in the first subparagraph, the technical documentation referred to in Annex VIII shall contain an explanation of the technical specifications, standards and conditions used to measure, calculate or estimate the values for the electrochemical performance and durability parameters. That explanation shall include, at least, the elements set out in Part B of Annex IV.
2.   From either 18 August 2027 or 18 months after the date of entry into force of the delegated act referred to in the first subparagraph of paragraph 5, whichever is the latest, rechargeable industrial batteries with a capacity greater than 2 kWh, except those with exclusively external storage, shall meet the minimum values laid down in the delegated act adopted pursuant to the first subparagraph of paragraph 5 for the electrochemical performance and durability parameters set out in Part A of Annex IV.
3.   From either 18 August 2028 or 18 months after the date of entry into force of the delegated act referred to in the second subparagraph of paragraph 5, whichever is the latest, LMT batteries shall meet the minimum values laid down in the delegated act adopted pursuant to the second subparagraph of paragraph 5 for the electrochemical performance and durability parameters set out in Part A of Annex IV.
4.   Paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 shall not apply to a battery that has been subject to preparation for re-use, preparation for repurposing, repurposing or remanufacturing, where the economic operator placing that battery on the market or putting it into service demonstrates that the battery, before undergoing such operations, has been placed on the market or put into service before the dates on which those obligations become applicable in accordance with those paragraphs.
5.   By 18 February 2026, the Commission shall adopt a delegated act in accordance with Article 89 to supplement this Regulation by establishing minimum values for the electrochemical performance and durability parameters set out in Part A of Annex IV that rechargeable industrial batteries with a capacity greater than 2 kWh, except those with exclusively external storage, shall attain.
By 18 February 2027, the Commission shall adopt a delegated act in accordance with Article 89 to supplement this Regulation by establishing minimum values for the electrochemical performance and durability parameters set out in Part A of Annex IV that LMT batteries shall attain.
In preparing the delegated acts referred to in the first and second subparagraph, the Commission shall consider the need to reduce the life cycle environmental impact of rechargeable industrial batteries with a capacity greater than 2 kWh, except of those with exclusively external storage, and of LMT batteries, and ensure that the requirements laid down therein do not have a significant adverse impact on the functionality of those batteries or the appliances, light means of transport or other vehicles into which those batteries are incorporated, their affordability and industry’s competitiveness.
6.   The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 89 to amend the electrochemical performance and durability parameters set out in Annex IV in light of market developments and technical and scientific progress, including, in particular, related to technical specifications of the informal UNECE Working Group on Electric Vehicles and the Environment.
