Article 53
Recognition of due diligence schemes
1.   Governments, industry associations and groupings of interested organisations that have developed and oversee due diligence schemes (‘scheme owners’) may apply to have their due diligence schemes recognised by the Commission. The Commission is empowered to adopt implementing acts establishing the information requirements that the application for recognition is to contain. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 90(3).
2.   Where, on the basis of the evidence and information provided pursuant to the paragraph 1 of this Article, the Commission determines that the due diligence scheme referred to in that paragraph, enables economic operators to meet the requirements laid down in Articles 48, 49, 50 and 52, it shall adopt an implementing act granting that scheme a recognition of equivalence with the requirements laid down in this Regulation. The OECD Centre for Responsible Business Conduct shall be consulted prior to the adoption of that implementing act. That implementing act shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 90(3).
When making a determination on the recognition of a due diligence scheme, the Commission shall take into account the diverse industry practices covered by that scheme and shall have regard to the risk-based approach and method used by that scheme to identify risks.
3.   The Commission shall adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 89 setting out the criteria and the methodology according to which the Commission is to determine, in accordance with paragraph 2 of this Article, whether due diligence schemes enable economic operators to meet the requirements laid down in Articles 48, 49, 50 and 52. The Commission shall also, as appropriate, periodically verify that recognised due diligence schemes continue to fulfil the criteria that led to a decision to grant recognition of equivalence pursuant to paragraph 2 of this Article.
4.   The owner of a due diligence scheme for which the recognition of equivalence was granted in accordance with paragraph 2 shall inform the Commission without delay of any changes or updates made to that scheme. The Commission shall assess whether such changes or updates affect the recognition of equivalence of that scheme and take appropriate action.
5.   If there is evidence of repeated or significant cases where economic operators implementing a scheme recognised in accordance with paragraph 2 of this Article have failed to meet the requirements laid down in Articles 48, 49, 50 and 52, the Commission shall examine, in consultation with the owner of the recognised due diligence scheme, whether those cases indicate deficiencies in the scheme.
6.   Where the Commission identifies a failure to comply with the requirements laid down in Articles 48, 49, 50 and 52 or deficiencies in a recognised due diligence scheme, it may grant the scheme owner an appropriate period to take remedial action.
7.   Where the scheme owner fails or refuses to take the necessary remedial action, and where the Commission has determined that the failure or deficiencies referred to in paragraph 6 of this Article compromise the ability of the economic operator referred to in Article 48(1) implementing the scheme to comply with the requirements laid down in Articles 48, 49, 50 and 52 or where repeated or significant cases of non-compliance by economic operators implementing a scheme are due to deficiencies in the scheme, the Commission shall adopt an implementing act withdrawing the recognition of equivalence of the scheme. That implementing act shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 90(3).
8.   The Commission shall establish and keep up-to-date a register of recognised due diligence schemes. That register shall be made publicly available on the internet.

CHAPTER VIII



Management of waste batteries


