Article 41
Obligations of importers
1.   Importers shall only place on the market a battery which is compliant with Articles 6 to 10 and Articles 12, 13 and 14.
2.   Before placing a battery on the market, importers shall verify that:
(a)
the EU declaration of conformity and technical documentation referred to in Annex VIII have been drawn up and that the relevant conformity assessment procedure referred to in Article 17 has been carried out by the manufacturer;
(b)
the battery bears the CE marking referred to in Article 19, and is marked and labelled in accordance with Article 13;
(c)
the battery is accompanied by the documents required pursuant to Articles 6 to 10 and Articles 12, 13 and 14 and by instructions and safety information in a language or languages which can be easily understood by end-users, as determined by the Member State in which the battery is to be made available on the market; and
(d)
the manufacturer has complied with the requirements laid down in Article 38(6) and (7).
Where an importer considers or has reason to believe that a battery is not in conformity with Articles 6 to 10 and Articles 12, 13 and 14, the importer shall not place that battery on the market until it has been brought into conformity. Furthermore, where the battery presents a risk, the importer shall inform the manufacturer and the market surveillance authorities giving details of the non-compliance and of any corrective action taken.
3.   Importers shall indicate on the battery their name, registered trade name or registered trade mark, their postal address, indicating a single contact point, and, if available, web and email address. Where that is not possible, the required information shall be provided on the packaging or in a document accompanying the battery. The contact details shall be in a language or languages which can be easily understood by end-users, as determined by the Member State in which the battery is to be made available on the market, and shall be clear, understandable and legible.
4.   Importers shall ensure that, while a battery is under their responsibility, storage or transport conditions do not jeopardise its compliance with Articles 6 to 10 and Articles 12, 13 and 14.
5.   When deemed appropriate with regard to the risks presented by a battery, importers shall, to protect the human health and safety of consumers, carry out sample testing of marketed batteries, investigate, and, if necessary, keep a register of complaints, of non-conforming batteries and battery recalls, and shall keep distributors informed of such monitoring.
6.   Importers who consider or have reason to believe that a battery which they have placed on the market is not in conformity with Articles 6 to 10 and Articles 12, 13 and 14, shall immediately take the corrective action necessary to bring that battery into conformity, to withdraw it or recall it, as appropriate. Furthermore, where the battery presents a risk, importers shall immediately inform the market surveillance authority of the Member State in which they made the battery available on the market, giving details, in particular, of the non-compliance and of any corrective action taken.
7.   Importers shall, for 10 years after the battery has been placed on the market, keep a copy of the EU declaration of conformity at the disposal of the national authorities and ensure that the technical documentation referred to in Annex VIII is made available to those authorities, upon request.
8.   Importers shall, further to a reasoned request from a national authority, provide that authority with all the information and documentation necessary to demonstrate the conformity of a battery with Articles 6 to 10 and Articles 12, 13 and 14, in a language or languages which can be easily understood by that authority. That information and the documentation shall be provided in electronic format and, on request, in paper format. Importers shall cooperate with the national authority, at its request, on any action taken to eliminate the risks posed by batteries, which they have placed on the market.
