Article 38
Obligations of manufacturers
1.   When placing a battery on the market or putting it into service, including for the manufacturers’ own purposes, manufacturers shall ensure that the battery:
(a)
has been designed and manufactured in accordance with Articles 6 to 10 and Articles 12 and 14, and is accompanied by clear, understandable and readable instructions and safety information in a language or languages which can be easily understood by end-users, as determined by the Member State in which the battery is to be placed on the market or put into service; and
(b)
is marked and labelled in accordance with Article 13.
2.   Before placing a battery on the market or putting it into service, manufacturers shall draw up the technical documentation referred to in Annex VIII and carry out the relevant conformity assessment procedure, referred to in Article 17, or have it carried out.
3.   Where compliance of a battery with the applicable requirements has been demonstrated by the relevant conformity assessment procedure referred to in Article 17, manufacturers shall draw up an EU declaration of conformity in accordance with Article 18 and affix the CE marking in accordance with Articles 19 and 20.
4.   Manufacturers shall keep the technical documentation referred to in Annex IX and the EU declaration of conformity at the disposal of national authorities for 10 years after the battery has been placed on the market or put into service.
5.   Manufacturers shall ensure that procedures are in place for a battery that is part of a series production to remain in conformity with this Regulation. In doing so, manufacturers shall adequately take into account changes in the production process or in battery design or characteristics and changes in the harmonised standards referred to in Article 15, common specifications referred to in Article 16 or other technical specifications by reference to which the conformity of the battery is declared or by application of which its conformity is verified.
6.   Manufacturers shall ensure that batteries which they place on the market bear a model identification and batch or serial number, or product number or another element allowing their identification. Where the size or nature of the battery does not allow it, the required information shall be provided on the packaging or in a document accompanying the battery.
7.   Manufacturers shall indicate on the battery their name, registered trade name or registered trade mark, their postal address, indicating a single contact point, and, if available, web and email address. Where that is not possible, the required information shall be provided on the packaging or in a document accompanying the battery. The contact details shall be indicated in a language or languages which can be easily understood by end-users and market surveillance authorities, as determined by the Member State in which the battery is to be placed on the market or put into service, and shall be clear, understandable and legible.
8.   Manufacturers shall provide access to the data for the parameters set out in Annex VII in the battery management system referred to in Article 14(1), in accordance with the requirements laid down in that Article.
9.   Manufacturers who consider or have reason to believe that a battery which they have placed on the market or put into service is not in conformity with one or more of the applicable requirements laid down in Articles 6 to 10 and Articles 12, 13 and 14 shall immediately take the corrective action necessary to bring that battery into conformity, to withdraw it or recall it, as appropriate. Furthermore, where the battery presents a risk, manufacturers shall immediately inform the market surveillance authority of the Member State in which they made the battery available on the market, giving details, in particular, of the non-compliance and of any corrective action taken.
10.   Manufacturers shall, further to a reasoned request from a national authority, provide it with all the information and documentation necessary to demonstrate the conformity of the battery with the requirements laid down in Articles 6 to 10 and Articles 12, 13 and 14, in a language or languages which can be easily understood by that national authority. That information and documentation shall be provided in electronic format and, on request, in paper format. Manufacturers shall cooperate with the national authority, at its request, on any action taken to eliminate the risks posed by a battery which they have placed on the market or put into service.
11.   Economic operators that carry out preparation for re-use, preparation for repurposing, repurposing or remanufacturing, and place on the market or put into service a battery that has undergone any of those operations, shall be considered to be manufacturers for the purposes of this Regulation.
