Article 80
Union safeguard procedure
1.   Where, on completion of the procedure set out in Article 79(4), (6) and (7), objections are raised against a measure taken by market surveillance authorities, or where the Commission considers a national measure to be contrary to Union law, the Commission shall without delay enter into consultation with the Member States and the relevant economic operator or operators and shall evaluate the national measure. The Commission shall endeavour to conclude that evaluation within one month.
On the basis of the results of that evaluation, the Commission shall adopt an implementing act determining whether the national measure is justified or not. That implementing act shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 90(3).
2.   The Commission shall address the implementing act referred to in paragraph 1, second subparagraph, to all Member States and shall immediately communicate it to them and the relevant economic operator or operators.
If the national measure is considered justified, all Member States shall take the necessary measures to ensure that the non-compliant battery is withdrawn from their market, and shall inform the Commission accordingly.
If the national measure is considered unjustified, the Member State concerned shall withdraw that measure.
3.   Where the national measure is considered justified and the non-compliance of the battery is attributed to shortcomings in the harmonised standards referred to in Article 15 of this Regulation, the Commission shall apply the procedure provided for in Article 11 of Regulation (EU) No 1025/2012.
4.   Where the national measure is considered justified and the non-compliance of the battery is attributed to shortcomings in the common specifications referred to in Article 16, the Commission shall, without delay, adopt an implementing act amending or repealing the common specifications concerned. That implementing act shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 90(3).
