Article 58
Authorisation on fulfilment of extended producer responsibility
1.   A producer, in the case of individual fulfilment of extended producer responsibility obligations, and producer responsibility organisations appointed in the case of collective fulfilment of extended producer responsibility obligations, shall apply for an authorisation on fulfilment of extended producer responsibility from the competent authority.
2.   The authorisation shall be granted only where it is demonstrated:
(a)
that requirements laid down in Article 8a(3), points (a) to (d), of the Directive 2008/98/EC are complied with and the measures put in place by the producer or producer responsibility organisation are sufficient to fulfil the obligations set out in this Chapter with regard to the amount of batteries made available on the market for the first time within the territory of a Member State by the producer or producers on whose behalf the producer responsibility organisation acts; and
(b)
by providing documentary evidence, that the requirements of Article 59(1) and (2) or the requirements of Article 60(1), (2) and (4), are complied with and that all the arrangements are in place to make it possible to attain and maintain durably at least the collection target referred to in Article 59(3) and Article 60(3), respectively.
3.   Member States shall, in their measures laying down administrative and procedural rules referred to in Article 54(3), point (b), include the details of the authorisation procedure, which may differ according to whether it relates to individual or collective fulfilment of the extended producer responsibility obligations, and the modalities for verifying compliance of producers or producer responsibility organisations, including the information to be provided by producers or producer responsibility organisations to that end. The authorisation procedure shall include requirements on the verification of the arrangements put in place to ensure compliance with the requirements laid down in Article 59(1) and (2) and in Article 60(1), (2) and (4), and timeframes for the verification, which shall not exceed 12 weeks from the submission of a complete application dossier. The verification may be carried out by an independent expert, which shall issue a verification report on the result of verification.
4.   The producer or the producer responsibility organisations shall notify the competent authority without undue delay of any changes to the information contained in the authorisation, of any changes that concern the terms of the authorisation or of the permanent cessation of operations.
5.   The self-control mechanism provided for in Article 8a(3), point (d), of Directive 2008/98/EC shall be carried out regularly, and at least every three years, and upon request by the competent authority, in order to verify that the provisions in that point are complied with and the conditions for authorisation referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article continue to be met. The producer or the producer responsibility organisation shall, upon request, present a self-control report and, where necessary, the draft corrective action plan to the competent authority. Without prejudice to the competencies under paragraph 6 of this Article, the competent authority may make observations on the self-control report and on the draft corrective action plan, and shall communicate any such observations to the producer or the producer responsibility organisation. The producer or the producer responsibility organisation shall draw up and implement the corrective action plan based on those observations.
6.   The competent authority may decide to revoke the authorisation if collection targets laid down in Article 59(3) or Article 60(3) are not met or the producer or producer responsibility organisation no longer meets the requirements with regard to the organisation of the collection and treatment of waste batteries or fails in relation to reporting to the competent authority or fails to notify it of any changes that concern the terms of the authorisation, or has ceased operations.
7.   A producer, in the case of individual fulfilment of extended producer responsibility obligations, and producer responsibility organisations appointed in the case of collective fulfilment of extended producer responsibility, shall provide a guarantee intended to cover the costs related to waste management operations due by the producer, or the producer responsibility organisation, in the event of non-compliance with the extended producer responsibility obligations, including in the event of permanent cessation of their operations or insolvency. Member States may specify additional requirements concerning such guarantee. In the case of a state-run producer responsibility organisation, such guarantee may be provided otherwise than by the organisation itself and may take the form of a public fund that is financed by producers’ fees and for which the Member State running the organisation is jointly and severally liable.
