Article 8
The group capital test
1.   By way of derogation from Article 7, competent authorities may allow the application of this Article in the case of group structures which are deemed to be sufficiently simple, provided that there are no significant risks to clients or to market stemming from the investment firm group as a whole that would otherwise require supervision on a consolidated basis. Competent authorities shall notify EBA when they allow the application of this Article.
2.   For the purposes of this Article, the following shall apply:
(a)
‘own funds instruments’ means own funds as defined in Article 9 of this Regulation, without applying the deductions referred to in point (i) of Article 36(1), point (d) of Article 56, and point (d) of Article 66 of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013;
(b)
the terms ‘investment firm’, ‘financial institution’, ‘ancillary services undertaking’ and ‘tied agent’ shall also apply to undertakings established in third countries, which, were they established in the Union, would fulfil the definitions of those terms in Article 4.
3.   Union parent investment firms, Union parent investment holding companies, Union parent mixed financial holding companies and any other parent undertakings that are investment firms, financial institutions, ancillary services undertakings or tied agents in the investment firm group shall hold at least enough own funds instruments to cover the sum of the following:
(a)
the sum of the full book value of all of their holdings, subordinated claims and instruments referred to in point (i) of Article 36(1), point (d) of Article 56, and point (d) of Article 66 of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 in investment firms, financial institutions, ancillary services undertakings and tied agents in the investment firm group; and
(b)
the total amount of all of their contingent liabilities in favour of investment firms, financial institutions, ancillary services undertakings and tied agents in the investment firm group.
4.   Competent authorities may allow a Union parent investment holding company or a Union parent mixed financial holding company and any other parent undertaking that is an investment firm, a financial institution, an ancillary services undertaking or a tied agent in the investment firm group, to hold a lower amount of own funds than the amount calculated under paragraph 3, provided that this amount is no lower than the sum of the own funds requirements imposed on an individual basis on its subsidiary investment firms, financial institutions, ancillary services undertakings and tied agents, and the total amount of any contingent liabilities in favour of those entities.
For the purposes of this paragraph, the own funds requirements for subsidiary undertakings as referred to in the first subparagraph which are located in third countries shall be notional own funds requirements that ensure a satisfactory level of prudence to cover for the risks arising from those subsidiary undertakings, as approved by the relevant competent authorities.
5.   Union parent investment firms, Union parent investment holding companies, and Union parent mixed financial holding companies shall have systems in place to monitor and control the sources of capital and funding of all investment firms, investment holding companies, mixed financial holding companies, financial institutions, ancillary services undertakings and tied agents within the investment firm group.
PART TWO

OWN FUNDS

