Article 7
Prudential consolidation
1.   Union parent investment firms, Union parent investment holding companies and Union parent mixed financial holding companies shall comply with the obligations laid down in Parts Two, Three, Four, Six and Seven on the basis of their consolidated situation. The parent undertaking and those of its subsidiaries that are subject to this Regulation shall set up a proper organisational structure and appropriate internal control mechanisms in order to ensure that the data required for consolidation are duly processed and forwarded. In particular, the parent undertaking shall ensure that subsidiaries that are not subject to this Regulation implement arrangements, processes and mechanisms to ensure proper consolidation.
2.   For the purposes of paragraph 1 of this Article, when applying Part Two on a consolidated basis, the rules laid down in Title II of Part Two of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 shall also apply to investment firms.
For that purpose, when applying the provisions of Article 84(1), Article 85(1) and Article 87(1) of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 only the references to Article 92(1) of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 shall apply and shall consequently be read as referring to the own funds requirements set out under the corresponding provisions in this Regulation.
3.   Union parent investment firms, Union parent investment holding companies and Union parent mixed financial companies shall comply with the obligations laid down in Part Five on the basis of their consolidated situations.
4.   By way of derogation from paragraph 3, competent authorities may exempt the parent undertaking from compliance with that paragraph, taking into account the nature, scale and complexity of the investment firm group.
5.   EBA shall develop draft regulatory technical standards to specify the details of the scope and methods for prudential consolidation of an investment firm group, in particular for the purpose of calculating the fixed overheads requirement, the permanent minimum capital requirement, the K‐factor requirement on the basis of the consolidated situation of the investment firm group, and the method and necessary details to properly implement paragraph 2.
EBA shall submit those draft regulatory technical standards to the Commission by 26 December 2020.
Power is delegated to the Commission to supplement this Regulation by adopting the regulatory technical standards referred to in the first subparagraph in accordance with Articles 10 to 14 of Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010.
