Article 18
Commission report
1. The Commission shall publish a report on the implementation of this Directive at the latest 12 years after the date of entry into force of this Directive and every six years thereafter, and shall submit it to the European Parliament and to the Council.
2. The report shall include the following:
(a) a review of progress in the implementation of the Directive;
(b) a review of the status of surface water and groundwater in the Community undertaken in coordination with the European Environment Agency;
(c) a survey of the river basin management plans submitted in accordance with Article 15, including suggestions for the improvement of future plans;
(d) a summary of the response to each of the reports or recommendations to the Commission made by Member States pursuant to Article 12;
(e) a summary of any proposals, control measures and strategies developed under Article 16;
(f) a summary of the responses to comments made by the European Parliament and the Council on previous implementation reports.
3. The Commission shall also publish a report on progress in implementation based on the summary reports that Member States submit under Article 15(2), and submit it to the European Parliament and the Member States, at the latest two years after the dates referred to in Articles 5 and 8.
4. The Commission shall, within three years of the publication of each report under paragraph 1, publish an interim report describing progress in implementation on the basis of the interim reports of the Member States as mentioned in Article 15(3). This shall be submitted to the European Parliament and to the Council.
5. The Commission shall convene when appropriate, in line with the reporting cycle, a conference of interested parties on Community water policy from each of the Member States, to comment on the Commission's implementation reports and to share experiences.
Participants should include representatives from the competent authorities, the European Parliament, NGOs, the social and economic partners, consumer bodies, academics and other experts.

