Article 14
Update of the integrated national energy and climate plan
1.   By 30 June 2023, and subsequently by 1 January 2033 and every 10 years thereafter, each Member State shall submit to the Commission a draft update of the latest notified integrated national energy and climate plan or shall provide the Commission with reasons justifying why the plan does not require updating.
2.   By 30 June 2024, and subsequently by 1 January 2034 and every 10 years thereafter, each Member State shall submit to the Commission an update of its latest notified integrated national energy and climate plan, unless they have provided reasons why the plan does not require updating pursuant to paragraph 1.
3.   In the update referred to in paragraph 2, each Member State shall modify its national objective, target or contribution with regard to any of the quantified Union objectives, targets or contributions set out in point (a)(1) of Article 4 in order to reflect an increased ambition as compared to that set out in its latest notified integrated national energy and climate plan. In the update referred to in paragraph 2, each Member State shall modify its national objective, target, or contribution with regard to any of the quantified Union objectives, targets or contributions set out in points (a)(2) and (b) of Article 4 only in order to reflect an equal or increased ambition as compared to that set out in its latest notified integrated national energy and climate plan.
4.   Member States shall make efforts to mitigate in their updated integrated national energy and climate plan any adverse environmental impacts that become apparent as part of the integrated reporting pursuant to Articles 17 to 25.
5.   In its updates referred to in paragraph 2, Member States shall take into consideration the latest country-specific recommendations issued in the context of the European Semester as well as obligations deriving from the Paris Agreement.
6.   The procedures laid down in Article 9(2) and Articles 10 and 12 shall apply to the preparation and assessment of the updated integrated national energy and climate plans.
7.   This Article is without prejudice to the right of Member States to make changes and adaptations in national policies set out or referred to in their integrated national energy and climate plans at any time, provided such changes and adaptations are included in the integrated national energy and climate progress report.
