Article 26
Annual Reporting
1.   By 15 March 2021, and every year thereafter (year X), Member States shall report to the Commission:
(a)
the information referred to in Article 6(2) of Directive 2009/119/EC;
(b)
the information referred to in point 3 of Annex IX of Directive 2013/30/EU, in accordance with Article 25 of that Directive.
2.   By 31 July 2021, and every year thereafter (year X), Member States shall report to the Commission their approximated greenhouse gas inventories for the year X-1.
For the purposes of this paragraph, the Commission shall, on the basis of the Member States' approximated greenhouse gas inventories or, if a Member State has not communicated its approximated inventories by that date, on the basis of its own estimates, annually compile a Union approximated greenhouse gas inventory. The Commission shall make that information available to the public by 30 September every year.
3.   From 2023, Member States shall determine and report to the Commission final greenhouse gas inventory data by 15 March each year (year X) and preliminary data by 15 January each year, including the greenhouse gases and the inventory information listed in Annex V. The report on the final greenhouse gas inventory data shall also include a complete and up-to-date national inventory report. Within three months of receiving the reports, the Commission shall make the information referred to in point (n) of Part I of Annex V available to the Climate Change Committee referred to in point (a) of Article 44(1).
4.   Member States shall submit to the UNFCCC Secretariat national inventories containing the information submitted to the Commission on the final greenhouse gas inventory data in accordance with paragraph 3 by 15 April each year. The Commission shall, in cooperation with the Member States, annually compile a Union greenhouse gas inventory and prepare a Union greenhouse gas inventory report and shall submit them to the UNFCCC Secretariat by 15 April each year.
5.   Member States shall report to the Commission the preliminary and the final national inventory data, by 15 January and 15 March respectively in the years 2027 and 2032, prepared for their LULUCF accounts for the purpose of the compliance reports in accordance with Article 14 of Regulation (EU) 2018/841.
6.   The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 43in order to:
(a)
amend Part 2 of Annex V by adding or deleting substances in the list of greenhouse gases, in accordance with relevant decisions adopted by the bodies of the UNFCCC or of the Paris Agreement;
(b)
supplement this Regulation by adopting values for global warming potentials and specifying the inventory guidelines applicable in accordance with relevant decisions adopted by the bodies of the UNFCCC or of the Paris Agreement.
7.   The Commission, assisted by the Climate Change Committee referred to in point (a) of Article 44(1), shall adopt implementing acts to set out the structure, technical details, format and processes for the Member States' submission of approximated greenhouse gas inventories pursuant to paragraph 2 of this Article, greenhouse gas inventories pursuant to paragraph 3 of this Article and accounted greenhouse gas emissions and removals in accordance with Articles 5 and 14 of Regulation (EU) 2018/841.
In proposing such implementing acts the Commission shall take into account the UNFCCC or Paris Agreement timetables for the monitoring and reporting of that information and the relevant decisions adopted by the bodies of the UNFCCC or of the Paris Agreement in order to ensure compliance by the Union with its reporting obligations as a Party to the UNFCCC and the Paris Agreement. Those implementing acts shall also specify the timescales for cooperation and coordination between the Commission and the Member States in preparing the Union greenhouse gas inventory report.
Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 44(6).
