Article 71
Form and manner of publication of notices
1.   Notices referred to in Articles 67 to 70 shall include the information set out in Annexes VI Part A, VI Part B, X, XI, and XII and in the format of standard forms, including standard forms for corrigenda.
The Commission shall establish those standard forms by means of implementing acts. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the advisory procedure referred to in Article 105.
2.   Notices referred to in Articles 67 to 70 shall be drawn up, transmitted by electronic means to the Publications Office of the European Union and published in accordance with Annex IX. Notices shall be published not later than five days after they are sent. The costs of publication of the notices by Publications Office of the European Union shall be borne by the Union.
3.   Notices referred to in Articles 67 to 70 shall be published in full in the official language(s) of the institutions of the Union chosen by the contracting entity. That language version or those language versions shall constitute the sole authentic text(s). A summary of the important elements of each notice shall be published in the other official languages of the institutions of the Union.
4.   The Publications Office of the European Union shall ensure that the full text and the summary of periodic indicative notices referred to in Article 67(2), calls for competition setting up a dynamic purchasing system as referred to in point (a) of Article 52(4) and notices on the existence of a qualification system used as a means of calling for competition in accordance with point (b) of Article 44(4) continue to be published:
(a)
in the case of periodic indicative notices for 12 months or until receipt of a contract award notice as provided for in Article 70(2) indicating that no further contracts will be awarded during the 12 month period covered by the call for competition. However, in the case of contracts for social and other specific services, the periodic indicative notice referred to in point (b) of Article 92(1) shall continue to be published until the end of its originally indicated period of validity or until receipt of a contract award notice as provided for in Article 70 indicating that no further contracts will be awarded during the period covered by the call for competition;
(b)
in the case of calls for competition setting up a dynamic purchasing system for the period of validity of the dynamic purchasing system;
(c)
in the case of notices on the existence of a qualification system for its period of validity.
5.   Contracting entities shall be able to supply proof of the dates on which notices are dispatched.
The Publications Office of the European Union shall give the contracting entity confirmation of the receipt of the notice and of the publication of the information sent, indicating the date of that publication. Such confirmation shall constitute proof of publication.
6.   Contracting entities may publish notices for works, supply or service contracts that are not subject to the publication requirements laid down in this Directive provided that those notices are sent to the Publications Office of the European Union by electronic means in accordance with the format and procedures for transmission indicated in Annex IX.
