Article 55
Centralised purchasing activities and central purchasing bodies
1.   Member States may provide that contracting entities may acquire works, supplies and/or services from a central purchasing body offering the centralised purchasing activity referred to in point (a) of point (10) of Article 2.
Member States may also provide that contracting entities may acquire works, supplies and services by using contracts awarded by a central purchasing body, by using dynamic purchasing systems operated by a central purchasing body or by using a framework agreement concluded by a central purchasing body offering the centralised purchasing activity referred to in point (b) of point (10) of Article 2. Where a dynamic purchasing system which is operated by a central purchasing body may be used by other contracting entities, this shall be mentioned in the call for competition setting up that dynamic purchasing system.
In relation to the first and second subparagraphs, Member States may provide that certain procurements are to be made by having recourse to central purchasing bodies or to one or more specific central purchasing bodies.
2.   A contracting entity fulfils its obligations pursuant to this Directive when it acquires supplies or services from a central purchasing body offering the centralised purchasing activity referred to in point (a) of point (10) of Article 2.
Furthermore, a contracting entity also fulfils its obligations pursuant to this Directive where it acquires works, supplies or services by using contracts awarded by the central purchasing body, by using dynamic purchasing systems operated by the central purchasing body or by using a framework agreement concluded by the central purchasing body offering the centralised purchasing activity referred to in point (b) of point (10) of Article 2.
However, the contracting entity concerned shall be responsible for fulfilling the obligations pursuant to this Directive in respect of the parts it conducts itself, such as:
(a)
awarding a contract under a dynamic purchasing system, which is operated by a central purchasing body; or
(b)
conducting a reopening of competition under a framework agreement that has been concluded by a central purchasing body.
3.   All procurement procedures conducted by a central purchasing body shall be performed using electronic means of communication, in accordance with the requirements set out in Article 40.
4.   Contracting entities may, without applying the procedures provided for in this Directive, award a service contract for the provision of centralised purchasing activities to a central purchasing body.
Such service contracts may also include the provision of ancillary purchasing activities.
