Article 67
Periodic indicative notices
1.   Contracting entities may make known their intentions of planned procurement through the publication of a periodic indicative notice. Those notices shall contain the information set out in part A, section I of Annex VI. They shall be published either by the Publications Office of the European Union or by the contracting entities on their buyer profiles in accordance with point 2(b) of Annex IX. Where the periodic indicative notice is published by the contracting entities on their buyer profile, they shall send a notice of the publication of the periodic indicative notice on a buyer profile to the Publications Office of the European Union in accordance with point 3 of Annex IX. Those notices shall contain the information set out in Annex VI Part B.
2.   When a call for competition is made by means of a periodic indicative notice in respect of restricted procedures and negotiated procedures with prior call for competition, the notice shall meet all the following requirements:
(a)
it refers specifically to the supplies, works or services that will be the subject of the contract to be awarded;
(b)
it indicates that the contract will be awarded by restricted or negotiated procedure without further publication of a call for competition and invites interested economic operators to express their interest;
(c)
it contains, in addition to the information set out in part A, section I of Annex VI, the information set out in part A, section II of Annex VI;
(d)
it has been sent for publication between 35 days and 12 months prior to the date on which the invitation to confirm interest is sent.
Such notices shall not be published on a buyer profile. However, the additional publication at national level pursuant to Article 72, if any, may be made on a buyer profile.
The period covered by the periodic indicative notice shall be a maximum of 12 months from the date the notice is transmitted for publication. However, in the case of contracts for social and other specific services, the periodic indicative notice referred to in point (b) of Article 92(1) may cover a period which is longer than 12 months.
