Article 75
Informing applicants for qualification, candidates and tenderers
1.   Contracting entities shall as soon as possible inform each candidate and tenderer of decisions reached concerning the conclusion of a framework agreement, the award of the contract or admittance to a dynamic purchasing system, including the grounds for any decision not to conclude a framework agreement or award a contract for which there has been a call for competition or to recommence the procedure, or not to implement a dynamic purchasing system.
2.   On request from the candidate or tenderer concerned, contracting entities shall, as soon as possible, and in any event within 15 days from receipt of a written request, inform:
(a)
any unsuccessful candidate of the reasons for the rejection of its request to participate;
(b)
any unsuccessful tenderer of the reasons for the rejection of its tender, including, for the cases referred to in Article 60(5) and (6), the reasons for their decision of non-equivalence or their decision that the works, supplies or services do not meet the performance or functional requirements;
(c)
any tenderer that has made an admissible tender of the characteristics and relative advantages of the tender selected, as well as the name of the successful tenderer or the parties to the framework agreement;
(d)
any tenderer that has made an admissible tender of the conduct and progress of negotiations and dialogue with tenderers.
3.   Contracting entities may decide to withhold certain information referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2, regarding the contract award, the conclusion of the framework agreement or the admittance to a dynamic purchasing system is to be withheld where its release would impede law enforcement or otherwise be contrary to the public interest or would prejudice the legitimate commercial interests of a particular economic operator, public or private, or might prejudice fair competition between economic operators.
4.   Contracting entities which establish and operate a system of qualification shall inform applicants of their decision as to qualification within a period of six months.
If the decision will take longer than four months from the presentation of an application, the contracting entity shall inform the applicant, within two months of the application, of the reasons justifying the longer period and of the date by which his application will be accepted or refused.
5.   Applicants whose qualification is refused shall be informed of the refusal decision and the reasons for that decision as soon as possible and no more than 15 days later than the date of the refusal decision. The reasons shall be based on the criteria for qualification referred to in Article 77(2).
6.   Contracting entities which establish and operate a system of qualification may bring the qualification of an economic operator to an end only for reasons based on the criteria for qualification referred to in Article 77(2). Any intention to bring the qualification to an end shall be notified in writing to the economic operator at least 15 days before the date on which the qualification is due to end, together with the reason or reasons justifying the proposed action.
