Article 6
Tasks of the Administrative Board
1.   The Administrative Board shall ensure that the Agency performs the work entrusted to it, under the conditions set out in this Regulation, and shall take any necessary decision to that end, without prejudice to the competences entrusted to the Security Accreditation Board for the activities under Chapter III.
2.   The Administrative Board shall also:
(a)
adopt, by 30 June of the first year of the multiannual financial framework provided for under Article 312 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, the multiannual work programme of the Agency for the period covered by that multiannual financial framework after incorporating, without any change, the section drafted by the Security Accreditation Board in accordance with point (a) of Article 11(4) and after having received the Commission’s opinion. The European Parliament shall be consulted on this multiannual work programme, provided that the purpose of the consultation is an exchange of views and the outcome is not binding on the Agency;
(b)
adopt, by 15 November each year, the Agency’s work programme for the following year having incorporated, without any change, the section drafted by the Security Accreditation Board, in accordance with point (b) of Article 11(4) and after having received the Commission’s opinion;
(c)
perform the budgetary functions laid down in Article 13(5), (6), (10) and (11) and Article 14(5);
(d)
oversee the operation of the Galileo Security Monitoring Centre as referred to in point (a)(ii) of Article 14(1) of Regulation (EU) No 1285/2013;
(e)
adopt arrangements to implement Regulation (EC) No 1049/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council (*2), in accordance with Article 21 of this Regulation;
(f)
approve the arrangements referred to in Article 23(2), after consulting the Security Accreditation Board on those provisions of those arrangements concerning security accreditation;
(g)
adopt technical procedures necessary to perform its tasks;
(h)
adopt the annual report on the activities and prospects of the Agency, having incorporated without any change the section drafted by the Security Accreditation Board in accordance with point (c) of Article 11(4) and forward it, by 1 July, to the European Parliament, the Council, the Commission and the Court of Auditors;
(i)
ensure adequate follow-up to the findings and recommendations stemming from the evaluations and audits referred to in Article 26, as well as those arising from the investigations conducted by the European Anti-Fraud Office (OLAF) and all internal or external audit reports, and forward to the budgetary authority all information relevant to the outcome of the evaluation procedures;
(j)
be consulted by the Executive Director on the delegation agreements referred to in Article 14(2) of Regulation (EU) No 1285/2013 before they are signed;
(k)
approve, on the basis of a proposal from the Executive Director, the working arrangements between the Agency and ESA referred to in Article 14(4) of Regulation (EU) No 1285/2013;
(l)
approve, on the basis of a proposal from the Executive Director, an anti-fraud strategy;
(m)
approve, where necessary and on the basis of proposals from the Executive Director, the Agency’s organisational structures.
(n)
adopt and publish its rules of procedure.
3.   With regard to the Agency’s staff, the Administrative Board shall exercise the powers conferred by the Staff Regulations of Officials of the European Union (*3) (“Staff Regulations”) on the appointing authority and by the Conditions of Employment of Other Servants on the authority empowered to conclude employment contracts (“the powers of the appointing authority”).
The Administrative Board shall adopt, in accordance with the procedure provided for in Article 110 of the Staff Regulations, a decision based on Article 2(1) of the Staff Regulations and on Article 6 of the Conditions of Employment of Other Servants delegating the relevant powers of the appointing authority to the Executive Director and defining the conditions under which this delegation of powers can be suspended. The Executive Director shall report back to the Administrative Board on the exercise of those delegated powers. The Executive Director shall be authorised to sub-delegate those powers.
In application of the second subparagraph of this paragraph, where exceptional circumstances so require, the Administrative Board may, by way of a decision, temporarily suspend the delegation of the powers of the appointing authority to the Executive Director and those sub-delegated by the latter and exercise them itself or delegate them to one of its members or to a staff member other than the Executive Director.
However, by way of derogation from the second subparagraph, the Administrative Board shall be required to delegate to the Chairperson of the Security Accreditation Board the powers referred to in the first subparagraph with regard to the recruitment, assessment and reclassification of staff involved in the activities covered by Chapter III and the disciplinary measures to be taken with regard to such staff.
The Administrative Board shall adopt the implementing measures of the Staff Regulations and the Conditions of Employment of Other Servants in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 110 of the Staff Regulations. It shall first consult the Security Accreditation Board and duly take into account its observations with regard to recruitment, assessment, reclassification of the staff involved in the activities under Chapter III and the relevant disciplinary measures to be taken.
It shall also adopt a decision laying down rules on the secondment of national experts to the Agency. Before adopting that decision, the Administrative Board shall consult the Security Accreditation Board with regard to the secondment of national experts involved in the security accreditation activities referred to in Chapter III and shall duly take account of its observations.
4.   The Administrative Board shall appoint the Executive Director and may extend or end his/her term of office pursuant to Article 15b(3) and (4).
5.   The Administrative Board shall exercise disciplinary authority over the Executive Director in relation to his/her performance, in particular as regards security matters falling within the competence of the Agency, except in respect of activities undertaken in accordance with Chapter III.
