Article 23
Participation of third countries and international organisations
1.   The Agency shall be open to the participation of third countries and international organisations. Such participation and the conditions therefor shall be established in an agreement between the Union and that third country or international organisation, in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 218 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union.
2.   In accordance with the relevant provisions of those agreements, practical arrangements shall be developed for the participation of third countries or international organisations in the work of the Agency, including arrangements relating to their participation in the initiatives undertaken by the Agency, to financial contributions and to staff.
Article 23a
Joint procurement with the Member States
For the performance of its tasks, the Agency shall be authorised to award contracts jointly with the Member States in accordance with Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 1268/2012 (*10).

(*10)  Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 1268/2012 of 29 October 2012 on the rules of application of Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council on the financial rules applicable to the general budget of the Union (OJ L 362, 31.12.2012, p. 1).’;"
                        
(13)
Article 26 is replaced by the following:
‘Article 26
Revision, evaluation and audit
1.   By 31 December 2016, and every five years thereafter, the Commission shall evaluate the Agency concerning, in particular, its impact, effectiveness, smooth running, working methods, requirements and use of the resources entrusted to it. The evaluation shall include, in particular, an assessment of any change in the scope or nature of the Agency’s tasks and the financial impact thereof. It shall address the application of the Agency’s policy on conflicts of interest and it shall also reflect any circumstances that may have impaired the independence and autonomy of the Security Accreditation Board.
2.   The Commission shall submit a report on the evaluation and its conclusions to the European Parliament, the Council, the Administrative Board and the Security Accreditation Board of the Agency. The results of the evaluation shall be made available to the public.
3.   One evaluation in two shall include an inspection of the Agency’s balance sheet in terms of its objectives and tasks. If the Commission considers that the continuation of the Agency is no longer justified with regard to the objectives and tasks assigned to it, the Commission may, where appropriate, propose that this Regulation be repealed.
4.   External audits on the performance of the Agency may be carried out at the request of the Administrative Board or the Commission.’.
