Article 5
Administrative Board
1.   An Administrative Board is hereby set up to perform the tasks listed in Article 6.
2.   The Administrative Board shall be composed of:
(a)
one representative appointed by each Member State;
(b)
four representatives appointed by the Commission;
(c)
one non-voting representative appointed by the European Parliament.
Members of the Administrative Board and of the Security Accreditation Board shall be appointed on the basis of their degree of relevant experience and expertise.
The term of office of the members of the Administrative Board shall be four years renewable once. The European Parliament, the Commission and the Member States shall endeavour to limit the turnover of their representatives on the Administrative Board.
The Chairperson or the Deputy Chairperson of the Security Accreditation Board, a representative of the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy (the “HR”) and a representative of the European Space Agency (“ESA”) shall be invited to attend the meetings of the Administrative Board as observers, under the conditions laid down in the rules of procedure of the Administrative Board.
3.   Where appropriate, the participation of representatives of third countries or international organisations and the conditions therefor shall be established in the agreements referred to in Article 23(1) and shall comply with the rules of procedure of the Administrative Board.
4.   The Administrative Board shall elect a Chairperson and a Deputy Chairperson from among its members. The Deputy Chairperson shall automatically take the place of the Chairperson when the Chairperson is prevented from attending to his/her duties. The term of office of the Chairperson and of the Deputy Chairperson shall be two years, renewable once, and each term of office shall expire when that person ceases to be a member of the Administrative Board.
The Administrative Board shall have the power to dismiss the Chairperson, the Deputy Chairperson or both of them.
5.   The meetings of the Administrative Board shall be convened by its Chairperson.
The Executive Director shall normally take part in the deliberations, unless the Chairperson decides otherwise.
The Administrative Board shall hold an ordinary meeting twice a year. In addition, it shall meet on the initiative of its Chairperson or at the request of at least one third of its members.
The Administrative Board may invite any person whose opinion may be of interest to attend its meetings as an observer. The members of the Administrative Board may, subject to its rules of procedure, be assisted by advisers or experts.
The secretariat of the Administrative Board shall be provided by the Agency.
6.   Unless this Regulation provides otherwise, the Administrative Board shall take its decisions by an absolute majority of its voting members.
A majority of two-thirds of all voting members shall be required for the election and dismissal of the Chairperson and Deputy Chairperson of the Administrative Board as referred to in paragraph 4, and for the adoption of the budget and work programmes.
7.   Each representative of the Member States and of the Commission shall have one vote. The Executive Director shall not vote. Decisions based on points (a) and (b) of Article 6(2) and Article 6(5), except for matters covered by Chapter III, shall not be adopted without a favourable vote of the representatives of the Commission.
The rules of procedure of the Administrative Board shall establish more detailed voting arrangements, in particular the conditions for a member to act on behalf of another member.
