Article 44
Monitoring progress
1.   By 24 November 2026, the Commission shall submit a report, including indicative projections of the annual consumption of each critical raw material in 2030, 2040 and 2050, including a low, a high and a reference projection, as well as indicative benchmarks for extraction and processing per strategic raw material, with a view to meeting the benchmarks set in Article 5(1), point (a), for 2030.
2.   By 24 May 2027 and at least every three years thereafter, the Commission shall, taking into account the advice of the Board, monitor progress towards the benchmarks set in Article 5(1), as well as the moderation of the expected increase in Union consumption of critical raw materials referred to in Article 5(2) and publish a report detailing the Union’s progress towards meeting those benchmarks and that moderation.
3.   The report referred to in paragraph 2 shall include:
(a)
quantitative information on the extent of the Union’s progress towards the benchmarks and the moderation referred to in Article 5;
(b)
a list of Strategic Partnerships concluded between the Union and third countries covering raw materials; and
(c)
an assessment of the contribution of the Strategic Partnerships to reaching the benchmark set in Article 5(1), point (b).
For the purposes of this Article, economic operators shall not be required to submit information in addition to the information provided pursuant to Article 21.
4.   To ensure the coherent implementation of this Regulation, the Commission shall monitor the consistency of its actions undertaken to implement it with other Union law. In addition, the Commission shall publish, by 24 May 2025, a report on the consistency of this Regulation with other Union law.
5.   Where, on the basis of the report referred to in paragraph 1, the Commission concludes that the Union is likely not to achieve the aims of Article 5, it shall assess the feasibility and proportionality of proposing measures in order to ensure the achievement of those aims.
6.   The Commission shall request the European Standardisation organisations to develop European standards or European standardisation deliverables to support the objectives of this Regulation.
