Article 8
Reporting and information obligations for Strategic Projects
1.   The project promoter shall, every two years after the date of recognition as a Strategic Project, submit a report to the Commission containing information on at least:
(a)
progress in the implementation of the Strategic Project, in particular with regard to the permit-granting process;
(b)
where relevant, reasons for delays compared to the timetable referred to in Article 7(1), point (c) and a plan to overcome such delays;
(c)
progress in financing the Strategic Project, including information on public financial support.
The Commission shall submit a copy of the report referred to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph to the Board in order to facilitate the discussions referred to in Article 36(7), point (c).
2.   The Commission may, where necessary, request additional information from project promoters relevant to the implementation of the Strategic Project to ascertain the continuing fulfilment of the criteria laid down in Article 6(1).
3.   The project promoter shall notify the Commission of:
(a)
changes to the Strategic Project affecting its fulfilment of the criteria laid down in Article 6(1);
(b)
changes in control of the undertakings involved in the Strategic Project on a lasting basis, compared to the information referred to in Article 7(1), point (e).
4.   The Commission may adopt implementing acts establishing a single template to be used by project promoters to provide all the information required for the reports referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article. The single template may indicate how the information referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article is to be expressed. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the advisory procedure referred to in Article 39(2).
The extent of documentation required to complete the single template referred to in the first subparagraph shall be reasonable.
5.   The project promoter shall establish and regularly update the undertaking’s website or a dedicated project website with information relevant to the local population and to foster public acceptance about the Strategic Project, including at least information on the environmental, social and economic impacts and benefits associated with the Strategic Project. The relevant part of the undertaking’s website or dedicated project website shall be accessible by the public free of charge and shall not require the provision of personal information (free-access website). It shall be available in a language or languages that can be easily understood by the local population.
