Article 10
Priority status of Strategic Projects
1.   Strategic Projects shall be considered to contribute to the security of supply of strategic raw materials in the Union.
2.   With regard to the environmental impacts or obligations addressed in Article 6(4) and Article 16(1), point (c), of Directive 92/43/EEC, Article 4(7) of Directive 2000/60/EC and Article 9(1), point (a), of Directive 2009/147/EC or in Union legislative provisions regarding the restoration of terrestrial, coastal and freshwater ecosystems, Strategic Projects in the Union shall be considered to be of public interest or serving public health and safety, and may be considered to have an overriding public interest provided that all the conditions set out in those Union legislative acts are fulfilled.
3.   For the purpose of ensuring the efficient administration of the permit-granting process related to Strategic Projects in the Union, project promoters and all authorities concerned shall ensure that that process is carried out in the most rapid way possible in accordance with Union and national law.
4.   Without prejudice to obligations provided for in Union law, Strategic Projects in the Union shall be granted the status of the highest national significance possible, where such a status exists in national law, and be treated accordingly in the permit-granting processes.
5.   All dispute resolution procedures, litigation, appeals and judicial remedies related to the permit-granting process and the issuance of permits for Strategic Projects in the Union before any national courts, tribunals or panels, including with regard to mediation or arbitration, where they exist in national law, shall be treated as urgent if and to the extent to which national law provides for such urgency procedures and provided that the usually applicable rights of defence of individuals or of local communities are respected. Project promoters of Strategic Projects shall participate in such urgency procedures, where applicable.
