Article 12
Environmental assessments and authorisations
1.   Where an environmental impact assessment is required for a Strategic Project in accordance with Articles 5 to 9 of Directive 2011/92/EU, the relevant project promoter shall request, no later than 30 days after the notification of the recognition as a Strategic Project and before submitting the application, an opinion from the single point of contact concerned on the scope and level of detail of the information to be included in the environmental impact assessment report under Article 5(1) of that Directive.
The single point of contact concerned shall ensure that the opinion referred to in the first subparagraph is issued as soon as possible and within a period of time not exceeding 45 days from the date on which the project promoter submitted its request for an opinion.
2.   In the case of Strategic Projects for which the obligation to carry out assessments of the effects on the environment arises simultaneously from Directives 92/43/EEC, 2000/60/EC, 2008/98/EC, 2009/147/EC, 2010/75/EU, 2011/92/EU or Directive 2012/18/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council (39), Member States shall ensure that a coordinated or a joint procedure fulfilling all the requirements of those Union legislative acts is applied.
Under the coordinated procedure referred to in the first subparagraph, the competent authority shall coordinate the various individual assessments of the environmental impact of a particular project required by the relevant Union legislative acts.
Under the joint procedure referred to in the first subparagraph, the competent authority shall provide for a single assessment of the environmental impact of a particular project required by the relevant Union legislative acts.
3.   Member States shall ensure that the competent authorities issue the reasoned conclusion referred to in Article 1(2), point (g)(iv), of Directive 2011/92/EU on the environmental impact assessment of a Strategic Project within 90 days of receiving all necessary information pursuant to Articles 5, 6 and 7 of that Directive and after completing the consultations referred to in Articles 6 and 7 of that Directive.
4.   In exceptional cases, where the nature, complexity, location or size of the proposed project so require, Member States may extend the time limit referred to in paragraph 3 by a maximum of 20 days, before its expiry and on a case-by-case basis. In that event, the single point of contact concerned shall inform the project promoter in writing of the reasons justifying the extension and of the deadline for its reasoned conclusion.
5.   In the case of Strategic Projects, the timeframe for consulting the public concerned as referred to in Article 1(2), point (e), of Directive 2011/92/EU and authorities referred to in Article 6(1) of that Directive on the environmental impact assessment report referred to in Article 5(1) of that Directive shall not be longer than 85 days and, in accordance with Article 6(7) of that Directive, not shorter than 30 days. In exceptional cases, where the nature, complexity, location or size of the proposed project so require, the Member State concerned may extend the timeframe by up to 40 days. The single point of contact concerned shall inform the project promoter of the reasons justifying such an extension.
6.   Paragraph 1 shall not apply to the permit-granting process for Strategic Projects that had entered in the permit-granting process before being recognised as a Strategic Project.
Paragraphs 2 to 5 shall apply to the permit-granting process for Strategic Projects that had entered in the permit-granting process before being recognised as a Strategic Project only to the extent that the steps addressed in those paragraphs have not yet been completed.
