Article 9
Single point of contact
1.   By 24 February 2025, Member States shall establish or designate one or more authorities as single points of contact. Where a Member State establishes or designates more than one such point of contact, it shall ensure that there is only one such point of contact per relevant administrative level and stage of the critical raw materials value chain.
2.   Where a Member State establishes or designates more than one point of contact pursuant to paragraph 1 of this Article, it shall provide a simple, accessible website on which all points of contact, including their address and electronic means of communication, are clearly listed and categorised according to the relevant administrative level and the stage of the critical raw materials value chain. The website may also contain content provided pursuant to Article 18.
3.   The single points of contact established or designated pursuant to paragraph 1 of this Article (single points of contact) shall be responsible for facilitating and coordinating the permit-granting process for critical raw material projects and providing information on the elements referred to in Article 18, including information on when an application is considered to be complete in accordance with Article 11(6). They shall coordinate and facilitate the submission of any relevant documents and information.
4.   The single point of contact concerned shall be the sole point of contact for the project promoter and shall assist the project promoter in understanding any administrative matter relevant to the permit-granting process.
5.   Project promoters of critical raw materials projects shall have the possibility to contact the relevant administrative unit, within the single point of contact, responsible for the tasks provided for in this Article. If the relevant administrative unit changes, it shall continue to fulfil its responsibilities set out in this paragraph until the project promoter has been notified of such a change.
6.   Project promoters shall be allowed to submit all documents relevant to the permit-granting process in electronic form.
7.   The Member States shall ensure that any valid studies carried out, or permits or authorisations issued, for a given critical raw material project are taken into account and that no duplicate studies, permits or authorisations are required, unless otherwise required under Union or national law.
8.   Member States shall ensure that applicants have easy access to information on and procedures for the settlement of disputes concerning the permit-granting process for critical raw materials projects, including, where applicable, alternative dispute resolution mechanisms.
9.   Member States shall ensure that the single points of contact have a sufficient number of qualified staff and sufficient financial, technical and technological resources necessary for the effective performance of their tasks under this Regulation.
