Article 11
Duration of the permit-granting process
1.   For Strategic Projects in the Union, the permit-granting process shall not exceed:
(a)
27 months for Strategic Projects involving extraction;
(b)
15 months for Strategic Projects involving only processing or recycling.
2.   By way of derogation from paragraph 1, for Strategic Projects in the Union that were subject to the permit-granting process before being recognised as Strategic Projects and for extensions of existing Strategic Projects that have already been granted a permit, the duration of the permit-granting process after the project is recognised as a Strategic Project shall not exceed:
(a)
24 months for Strategic Projects involving extraction;
(b)
12 months for Strategic Projects involving only processing or recycling.
3.   Where an environmental impact assessment is required pursuant to Directive 2011/92/EU, the step of the assessment referred to in Article 1(2), point (g)(i), of that Directive shall not be included in the duration for permit-granting process referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article.
4.   In exceptional cases, where the nature, complexity, location or size of the Strategic Project so require, Member States may extend, before their expiry and on a case-by-case basis, the time limits referred to in:
(a)
paragraph 1, point (a), and paragraph 2, point (a), by a maximum of six months;
(b)
paragraph 1, point (b), and paragraph 2, point (b), by a maximum of three months.
In the event of such an extension, the single point of contact concerned shall inform the project promoter in writing of the reasons justifying the extension and of the deadline for the comprehensive decision.
5.   By way of derogation from Article 4(6) of Directive 2011/92/EU, the determination of whether the Strategic Project is to be made subject to an assessment in accordance with Articles 5 to 10 of that Directive shall be made within 30 days from the date on which the developer has submitted all the information required pursuant to Article 4(4) of that Directive.
6.   No later than 45 days following the receipt of a permit-granting application related to a Strategic Project, the single point of contact concerned shall acknowledge that the application is complete or, if the project promoter has not sent all the information required to process an application, request the project promoter to submit a complete application without undue delay, specifying which information is missing. Where the application submitted is deemed to be incomplete a second time, the single point of contact concerned shall not request information in areas not covered in the first request for additional information and shall be entitled only to request further evidence to complete the identified missing information.
The date of the acknowledgement referred to in the first subparagraph shall serve as the start of the permit-granting process.
7.   No later than one month from the date of acknowledgement referred to in paragraph 6 of this Article, the single point of contact concerned shall draw up, in close cooperation with the project promoter and other competent authorities concerned, a detailed schedule for the permit-granting process. The schedule shall be published by the project promoter on the website referred to in Article 8(5). The single point of contact concerned shall update the schedule in the event that there are significant changes that potentially affect the timing of the comprehensive decision.
8.   The single point of contact concerned shall notify the project promoter when the environmental impact assessment report referred in Article 5(1) of Directive 2011/92/EU is due, taking into account the organisation of the permit-granting process in the Member State concerned and the need to allow sufficient time to assess the report. The period between the deadline for the submission of the environmental impact assessment report and the actual submission of that report shall not be counted towards the duration of the permit-granting process referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article.
9.   Where the consultation pursuant to Article 1(2), point (g)(ii), of Directive 2011/92/EU results in the need to supplement the environmental impact assessment report with additional information, the single point of contact concerned may give the project promoter the opportunity to provide additional information. In such a case, that single point of contact shall notify the project promoter when the additional information is due, which shall be in no less than 30 days after the notification. The period between the deadline for providing the additional information and the submission of that information shall not be counted towards the duration of the permit-granting process referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article.
10.   The time limits set in this Article shall be without prejudice to obligations arising from Union and international law, and without prejudice to administrative appeal procedures and judicial remedies before a court or tribunal.
The time limits set in this Article for any of the permit-granting procedures shall be without prejudice to any shorter time limits set by Member States.
