Article 30
Recognised schemes
1.   Governments, industry associations and groupings of interested organisations that have developed and oversee certification schemes related to the sustainability of critical raw materials (scheme owners) may apply to have their schemes recognised by the Commission.
Applications referred in the first subparagraph of this paragraph shall contain any relevant evidence related to the fulfilment of the criteria laid down in Annex IV.
By 24 May 2027, the Commission shall adopt implementing acts specifying a single template to be used by scheme owners to provide the minimum information that applications referred to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph are to contain. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 39(3).
The extent of documentation required to complete the single template referred to in the third subparagraph shall be reasonable.
2.   Where, on the basis of the evidence provided pursuant to the paragraph 1 of this Article, the Commission determines that a certification scheme meets the criteria laid down in Annex IV, or a subset thereof, it shall adopt implementing acts recognising that scheme and specifying the recognised coverage of the scheme. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 39(3).
3.   The recognised coverage for each scheme shall be specified along the following dimensions:
(a)
the stages of the raw materials value chain covered by the scheme;
(b)
the stages of the life-cycle of a project, including before, during and after closure, that are covered by the scheme; and
(c)
the sustainability dimensions and environmental risk categories listed in Annex IV, point (2) that are addressed by the scheme.
The requirements laid down in Annex IV, point 1(a) to (d) shall be a prerequisite for any recognition of the scheme.
4.   The Commission shall verify, at least every three years from the date of application of any implementing act adopted pursuant to paragraph 2, that it continues to fulfil the criteria laid down in Annex IV, or a recognised subset of those criteria.
5.   Owners of recognised schemes shall inform the Commission without delay of any changes or updates related to the fulfilment of the criteria laid down in Annex IV, or of a recognised subset of those criteria, made to those schemes. The Commission shall assess whether such changes or updates affect the basis for the recognition and take appropriate action.
6.   If there is evidence of repeated or significant cases where economic operators implementing a recognised scheme have failed to fulfil the requirements of that scheme, the Commission shall examine, in consultation with the owner of the recognised scheme, whether those cases indicate deficiencies in the scheme affecting the basis for the recognition and take appropriate action.
7.   Where the Commission identifies deficiencies in a recognised scheme affecting the basis for the recognition, it may grant the scheme owner an appropriate period, of not longer than 12 months, within which to take remedial action.
8.   Where the scheme owner fails or refuses to take the necessary remedial action and where the Commission has determined that the deficiencies referred to in paragraph 6 of this Article mean that the scheme no longer fulfils the criteria laid down in Annex IV, or of the recognised subset of those criteria, the Commission shall withdraw the recognition of the scheme by means of implementing acts. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 39(3).
9.   The Commission shall establish and keep up-to-date a register of recognised schemes. That register shall be made publicly available on a free-access website. That website shall also allow for the collation of feedback from all relevant stakeholders concerning the implementation of recognised schemes. Such feedback shall be submitted to the relevant scheme owners for consideration.
