Article 8
Methodology for short-term and seasonal adequacy assessments
1.   By 5 January 2020, the ENTSO for Electricity shall submit to ACER a proposal for a methodology for assessing seasonal and short-term adequacy, namely monthly, week-ahead to at least day-ahead adequacy, which shall cover at least the following:
(a)
the uncertainty of inputs such as the probability of a transmission capacity outage, the probability of an unplanned outage of power plants, severe weather conditions, variable demand, in particular peaks depending on weather conditions, and variability of production of energy from renewable sources;
(b)
the probability of the occurrence of an electricity crisis;
(c)
the probability of the occurrence of a simultaneous electricity crisis.
2.   The methodology referred to in paragraph 1 shall provide for a probabilistic approach, including multiple scenarios, and shall take into account the national, regional and Union context, including the level of interconnection between Member States and, to the extent possible, third countries within synchronous areas of the Union. The methodology shall take into account the specificities of each Member State's energy sector, including specific weather conditions and external circumstances.
3.   Before submitting the proposed methodology, the ENTSO for Electricity shall conduct a consultation involving at least the regional coordination centres, industry and consumer organisations, producers or their trade bodies, transmission system operators, relevant distribution system operators, competent authorities, regulatory authorities and other relevant national authorities. The ENTSO for Electricity shall duly take into account the results of the consultation and present them, together with the proposed methodology, at a meeting of the ECG.
4.   Within two months of receipt of the proposed methodology, ACER shall, after consulting the ECG in its formation composed only of representatives of the Member States, approve or amend the proposal. The ENTSO for Electricity and ACER shall publish the final version of the methodology on their websites.
5.   The ENTSO for Electricity shall update and improve the methodology in accordance with paragraphs 1 to 4 where significant new information becomes available. The ECG in its formation composed only of representatives of the Member States may recommend, and ACER or the Commission may request, such updates and improvements with due justification. Within six months of receipt of the request, the ENTSO for Electricity shall submit to ACER a draft of the proposed changes. Within two months of receipt of such a draft, ACER shall, after consulting the ECG, in its formation composed only of representatives of the Member States, approve or amend the proposed changes. The ENTSO for Electricity and ACER shall publish the final version of the updated methodology on their websites.
