Article 14
Early warning and declaration of an electricity crisis
1.   Where a seasonal adequacy assessment or other qualified source provides concrete, serious and reliable information that an electricity crisis may occur in a Member State, the competent authority of that Member State shall, without undue delay, issue an early warning to the Commission, the competent authorities of the Member States within the same region and, where they are not in the same region, the competent authorities of the directly connected Member States. The competent authority concerned shall also provide information on the causes of the possible electricity crisis, on measures planned or taken to prevent an electricity crisis and on the possible need for assistance from other Member States. The information shall include the possible impacts of the measures on the internal electricity market. The Commission shall provide that information to the ECG.
2.   When confronted with an electricity crisis, the competent authority shall, after consulting the transmission system operator concerned, declare an electricity crisis and inform the competent authorities of the Member States within the same region and, where they are not in the same region, the competent authorities of directly connected Member States, as well as the Commission, without undue delay. That information shall include the causes of the deterioration of the electricity supply situation, the reasons for declaring an electricity crisis, the measures planned or taken to mitigate it and the need for any assistance from other Member States.
3.   Where they consider the information provided pursuant to paragraph 1 or 2 to be insufficient, the Commission, the ECG or the competent authorities of the Member States within the same region and, where they are not in the same region, the competent authorities of directly connected Member States may request the Member State concerned to provide additional information.
4.   Where a competent authority issues an early warning or declares an electricity crisis, the measures set out in the risk-preparedness plan shall be followed to the fullest extent possible.
