Article 13
Commission assessment of the risk-preparedness plans
1.   Within four months of the notification of the adopted risk-preparedness plan by the competent authority, the Commission shall assess the plan taking duly into account the views expressed by the ECG.
2.   The Commission shall, after consulting the ECG, issue a non-binding opinion, setting out detailed reasons, and submit it to the competent authority, with a recommendation to review its risk-preparedness plan where that plan:
(a)
is not effective to mitigate the risks identified in the electricity crisis scenarios;
(b)
is inconsistent with the electricity crisis scenarios identified or with the risk-preparedness plan of another Member State;
(c)
does not comply with the requirements laid down in Article 10(2);
(d)
sets out measures that are likely to jeopardise the security of electricity supply of other Member States;
(e)
unduly distorts competition or the effective functioning of the internal market; or
(f)
does not comply with the provisions of this Regulation or other provisions of Union law.
3.   Within three months of receipt of the Commission's opinion referred to in paragraph 2, the competent authority concerned shall take full account of the Commission's recommendation and shall either notify the amended risk-preparedness plan to the Commission or notify the Commission of the reasons why it objects to the recommendation.
4.   In the event that the competent authority objects to the Commission's recommendation, the Commission may, within four months of receipt of the notification of the competent authority's reasons for objection, withdraw its recommendation or convene a meeting with the competent authority and, where the Commission considers it to be necessary, the ECG, in order to assess the issue. The Commission shall set out detailed reasons for requesting any modifications to the risk-preparedness plan. Where the final position of the competent authority concerned diverges from the Commission's detailed reasons, that competent authority shall provide the Commission with the reasons for its position within two months of receipt of the Commission's detailed reasons.
