Article 49
Freedom to issue in a CSD authorised in the Union
1.   An issuer shall have the right to arrange for its securities admitted to trading on regulated markets or MTFs or traded on trading venues to be recorded in any CSD established in any Member State, subject to compliance by that CSD with conditions referred to in Article 23.
Without prejudice to the issuer’s right referred to in the first subparagraph, the corporate or similar law of the Member State under which the securities are constituted shall continue to apply.
Member States shall ensure that a list of key relevant provisions of their law, as referred to in the second subparagraph, is compiled. Competent authorities shall communicate that list to ESMA by 18 December 2014. ESMA shall publish the list by 18 January 2015.
The CSD may charge a reasonable commercial fee for the provision of its services to issuers on a cost-plus basis, unless otherwise agreed by both parties.
2.   Where an issuer submits a request for recording its securities in a CSD, the latter shall treat such request promptly and in a non-discriminatory manner and provide a response to the requesting issuer within three months.
3.   A CSD may refuse to provide services to an issuer. Such a refusal shall be based only on a comprehensive risk assessment or if that CSD does not provide the services referred to in point (1) of Section A of the Annex in relation to securities constituted under the corporate or similar law of the relevant Member State.
4.   Without prejudice to Directive 2005/60/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (25) and Commission Directive 2006/70/EC (26), where a CSD refuses to provide services to an issuer, it shall provide the requesting issuer with full written reasons for its refusal.
In the case of a refusal, the requesting issuer shall have the right to complain to the competent authority of the CSD that refuses to provide its services.
The competent authority of that CSD shall duly examine the complaint by assessing the reasons for refusal provided by the CSD and shall provide the issuer with a reasoned reply.
The competent authority of the CSD shall consult the competent authority of the place of establishment of the requesting issuer on its assessment of the complaint. Where the competent authority of the place of establishment of the requesting issuer disagrees with that assessment, any one of the two competent authorities may refer the matter to ESMA, which may act in accordance with the powers conferred on it under Article 19 of Regulation (EU) No 1095/2010.
Where the refusal by the CSD to provide its services to an issuer is deemed to be unjustified, the responsible competent authority shall issue an order requiring the CSD to provide its services to the requesting issuer.
5.   ESMA shall, in close cooperation with the members of the ESCB, develop draft regulatory technical standards to specify the risks to be taken into account by CSDs when carrying out a comprehensive risk assessment, and competent authorities assessing the reasons for refusal in accordance with paragraphs 3 and 4, and the elements of the procedure referred to in paragraph 4.
ESMA shall submit those draft regulatory technical standards to the Commission by 18 June 2015.
Power is delegated to the Commission to adopt the regulatory technical standards referred to in the first subparagraph in accordance with Articles 10 to 14 of Regulation (EU) No 1095/2010.
6.   ESMA shall, in close cooperation with the members of the ESCB, develop draft implementing technical standards to establish standard forms and templates for the procedure referred to in paragraph 4.
ESMA shall submit those draft implementing technical standards to the Commission by 18 June 2015.
Power is conferred on the Commission to adopt the implementing technical standards referred to in the first subparagraph in accordance with Article 15 of Regulation (EU) No 1095/2010.
