Article 27
Senior management, management body and shareholders
1.   The senior management of a CSD shall be of sufficiently good repute and experience so as to ensure the sound and prudent management of the CSD.
2.   A CSD shall have a management body of which at least one third, but no less than two, of its members are independent.
3.   The remuneration of the independent and other non-executive members of the management body shall not be linked to the business performance of the CSD.
4.   The management body shall be composed of suitable members of sufficiently good repute with an appropriate mix of skills, experience and knowledge of the entity and of the market. The non-executive members of the management body shall decide on a target for the representation of the under-represented gender in the management body and prepare a policy on how to increase the number of the under-represented gender in order to meet that target. The target, policy and its implementation shall be made public.
5.   A CSD shall clearly determine the role and responsibilities of the management body in accordance with the relevant national law. A CSD shall make the minutes of the meetings of the management body available to the competent authority and the auditor upon request.
6.   The CSD’s shareholders and persons who are in a position to exercise, directly or indirectly, control over the management of the CSD shall be suitable to ensure the sound and prudent management of the CSD.
7.   A CSD shall:
(a)
provide the competent authority with, and make public, information regarding the ownership of the CSD, and in particular, the identity and scale of interests of any parties in a position to exercise control over the operation of the CSD;
(b)
inform and seek approval from its competent authority of any decision to transfer ownership rights which give rise to a change in the identity of the persons exercising control over the operation of the CSD. After receiving approval from its competent authority, the CSD shall make public the transfer of ownership rights.
Any natural or legal person shall inform without undue delay the CSD and its competent authority of a decision to acquire or dispose of its ownership rights that give rise to a change in the identity of the persons exercising control over the operation of the CSD.
8.   Within 60 working days from the receipt of the information referred to in paragraph 7, the competent authority shall take a decision on the proposed changes in the control of the CSD. The competent authority shall refuse to approve proposed changes in the control of the CSD where there are objective and demonstrable grounds for believing that they would pose a threat to the sound and prudent management of the CSD or to the ability of the CSD to comply with this Regulation.
