Article 53
Access between a CSD and another market infrastructure
1.   A CCP and a trading venue shall provide transaction feeds on a non-discriminatory and transparent basis to a CSD upon request by the CSD and may charge a reasonable commercial fee for such transaction feeds to the requesting CSD on a cost-plus basis, unless otherwise agreed by both parties.
A CSD shall provide access to its securities settlement systems on a non-discriminatory and transparent basis to a CCP or a trading venue and may charge a reasonable commercial fee for such access on a cost-plus basis, unless otherwise agreed by both parties.
2.   When a party submits a request for access to another party in accordance with paragraph 1, such request shall be treated promptly and a response to the requesting party shall be provided within three months.
3.   The receiving party shall deny access only where such access would affect the smooth and orderly functioning of the financial markets or cause systemic risk. It shall not deny a request on the grounds of loss of market share.
A party that refuses access shall provide the requesting party with full written reasons for such refusal based on a comprehensive risk assessment. In the case of a refusal, the requesting party has the right to complain to the competent authority of the party that has refused access.
The competent authority of the receiving party and the relevant authority referred to in point (a) of Article 12(1) shall duly examine the complaint by assessing the reasons for refusal and shall provide the requesting party with a reasoned reply.
The competent authority of the receiving party shall consult the competent authority of the requesting party and the relevant authority referred to in point (a) of Article 12(1) on its assessment of the complaint. Where any of the authorities of the requesting party disagrees with the assessment provided, any of them may refer the matter to ESMA, which may act in accordance with the powers conferred on it under Article 19 of Regulation (EU) No 1095/2010.
Where the refusal by a party to grant access is deemed to be unjustified, the responsible competent authority shall issue an order requiring that party to grant access to its services within three months.
4.   ESMA shall, in close cooperation with the members of the ESCB, develop draft regulatory technical standards to specify the risks to be taken into account by CSDs when carrying out a comprehensive risk assessment, and by competent authorities when assessing the reasons for refusal in accordance with paragraph 3, and the elements of the procedure referred to in paragraph 3.
ESMA shall submit those draft regulatory technical standards to the Commission by 18 June 2015.
Power is delegated to the Commission to adopt the regulatory technical standards referred to in the first subparagraph in accordance with Articles 10 to 14 of Regulation (EU) No 1095/2010.
5.   ESMA shall, in close cooperation with the members of the ESCB, develop draft implementing technical standards to establish standard forms and templates for the procedure referred to in paragraphs 2 and 3.
ESMA shall submit those draft implementing technical standards to the Commission by 18 June 2015.
Power is conferred on the Commission to adopt the implementing technical standards referred to in the first subparagraph in accordance with Article 15 of Regulation (EU) No 1095/2010.
