Article 6
Measures to prevent settlement fails
1.   Trading venues shall establish procedures that enable the confirmation of relevant details of transactions in financial instruments referred to in Article 5(1) on the date when the transaction has been executed.
2.   Notwithstanding the requirement laid down in paragraph 1, investment firms authorised pursuant to Article 5 of Directive 2014/65/EU shall, where applicable, take measures to limit the number of settlement fails.
Such measures shall at least consist of arrangements between the investment firm and its professional clients as referred to in Annex II to Directive 2014/65/EU to ensure the prompt communication of an allocation of securities to the transaction, confirmation of that allocation and confirmation of the acceptance or rejection of terms in good time before the intended settlement date.
ESMA shall, in close cooperation with the members of the ESCB, issue guidelines in accordance with Article 16 of Regulation (EU) No 1095/2010 on the standardised procedures and messaging protocols to be used for complying with the second subparagraph of this paragraph.
3.   For each securities settlement system it operates, a CSD shall establish procedures that facilitate the settlement of transactions in financial instruments referred to in Article 5(1) on the intended settlement date with a minimum exposure of its participants to counterparty and liquidity risks and a low rate of settlement fails. It shall promote early settlement on the intended settlement date through appropriate mechanisms.
4.   For each securities settlement system it operates, a CSD shall put in place measures to encourage and incentivise the timely settlement of transactions by its participants. CSDs shall require participants to settle their transactions on the intended settlement date.
5.   ESMA shall, in close cooperation with the members of the ESCB, develop draft regulatory technical standards to specify the measures to be taken by investment firms in accordance with the first subparagraph of paragraph 2, the details of the procedures facilitating settlement referred to in paragraph 3 and the details of the measures to encourage and incentivise the timely settlement of transactions referred to in paragraph 4.
ESMA shall submit those draft regulatory technical standards to the Commission by 18 June 2015.
Power is delegated to the Commission to adopt the regulatory technical standards referred to in the first subparagraph in accordance with Articles 10 to 14 of Regulation (EU) No 1095/2010.
