Article 55
Procedure for granting and refusing authorisation to provide banking-type ancillary services
1.   The CSD shall submit its application for authorisation to designate a credit institution or to provide any banking-type ancillary service, as required under Article 54, to the competent authority of its home Member State.
2.   The application shall contain all the information that is necessary to enable the competent authority to satisfy itself that the CSD and where applicable the designated credit institution have established, at the time of the authorisation, all the necessary arrangements to meet their obligations as laid down in this Regulation. It shall contain a programme of operations setting out the banking-type ancillary services envisaged, the structural organisation of the relations between the CSD and the designated credit institutions where applicable and how that CSD or where applicable the designated credit institution intends to meet the prudential requirements laid down in Article 59(1), (3) and (4) and the other conditions laid down in Article 54.
3.   The competent authority shall apply the procedure under Article 17(3) and (8).
4.   From the moment when the application is considered to be complete, the competent authority shall transmit all information included in the application to the following authorities:
(a)
the relevant authorities;
(b)
the competent authority referred to in point (40) of Article 4(1) of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013;
(c)
the competent authorities in the Member States where the CSD has established interoperable links with another CSD except where the CSD has established interoperable links referred to in Article 19(5);
(d)
the competent authorities in the host Member State where the activities of the CSD are of substantial importance for the functioning of the securities markets and the protection of investors within the meaning of Article 24(4);
(e)
the competent authorities responsible for the supervision of the participants of the CSD that are established in the three Member States with the largest settlement values in the CSD’s securities settlement system on an aggregate basis over a one-year period;
(f)
ESMA; and
(g)
EBA.
5.   The authorities referred to in points (a) to (e) of paragraph 4 shall issue a reasoned opinion on the authorisation within 30 days of receipt of the information referred to in paragraph 4. Where an authority does not provide an opinion within that deadline it shall be deemed to have a positive opinion.
Where at least one of the authorities referred to in points (a) to (e) of paragraph 4 issues a negative reasoned opinion, the competent authority wishing to grant the authorisation shall within 30 days provide the authorities referred to in points (a) to (e) of paragraph 4 with a reasoned decision addressing the negative opinion.
Where 30 days after that decision has been presented any of the authorities referred to in points (a) to (e) of paragraph 4 issues a negative opinion and the competent authority still wishes to grant the authorisation any of the authorities that issued a negative opinion may refer the matter to ESMA for assistance under point (c) of Article 31 of Regulation (EU) No 1095/2010.
Where 30 days after referral to ESMA the issue is not settled, the competent authority wishing to grant the authorisation shall take the final decision and provide a detailed explanation of its decision in writing to the authorities referred to in points (a) to (e) of paragraph 4.
Where the competent authority wishes to refuse authorisation, the matter shall not be referred to ESMA.
Negative opinions shall state in writing the full and detailed reasons why the requirements laid down in this Regulation or other parts of Union law are not met.
6.   Where ESMA considers that the competent authority referred to in paragraph 1 has granted an authorisation which may not be in conformity with Union law it shall act in accordance with Article 17 of Regulation (EU) No 1095/2010.
7.   ESMA shall, in close cooperation with the members of the ESCB and EBA, develop draft regulatory technical standards to specify the information that the CSD is to provide to the competent authority for the purpose of obtaining the relevant authorisations to provide the banking-type services ancillary to settlement.
ESMA shall submit those draft regulatory technical standards to the Commission by 18 June 2015.
Power is delegated to the Commission to adopt the regulatory technical standards referred to in the first subparagraph in accordance with Articles 10 to 14 of Regulation (EU) No 1095/2010.
8.   ESMA shall, in close cooperation with the members of the ESCB and EBA, develop draft implementing technical standards to establish standard forms, templates and procedures for the consultation of the authorities referred to in paragraph 4 prior to granting authorisation.
ESMA shall submit those draft implementing technical standards to the Commission by 18 June 2015.
Power is conferred on the Commission to adopt the implementing technical standards referred to in the first subparagraph in accordance with Article 15 of Regulation (EU) No 1095/2010.
