Article 23
Freedom to provide services in another Member State
1.   An authorised CSD may provide services referred to in the Annex within the territory of the Union, including through setting up a branch, provided that those services are covered by the authorisation.
2.   An authorised CSD that intends to provide the core services referred to in points 1 and 2 of Section A of the Annex in relation to financial instruments constituted under the law of another Member State referred to in Article 49(1) or to set up a branch in another Member State shall be subject to the procedure referred to in paragraphs 3 to 7.
3.   Any CSD wishing to provide the services referred to in paragraph 2 within the territory of another Member State for the first time, or to change the range of those services provided shall communicate the following information to the competent authority of the home Member State:
(a)
the Member State in which the CSD intends to operate;
(b)
a programme of operations stating in particular the services which the CSD intends to provide;
(c)
the currency or currencies that the CSD intends to process;
(d)
where there is a branch, the organisational structure of the branch and the names of those responsible for the management of the branch;
(e)
where relevant, an assessment of the measures the CSD intends to take to allow its users to comply with the national law referred to in Article 49(1).
4.   Within three months from the receipt of the information referred to in paragraph 3, the competent authority of the home Member State shall communicate that information to the competent authority of the host Member State unless, by taking into account the provision of services envisaged, it has reasons to doubt the adequacy of the administrative structure or the financial situation of the CSD wishing to provide its services in the host Member State.
The competent authority of the host Member State shall without delay inform the relevant authorities of that Member State of any communication received under the first subparagraph.
5.   Where the competent authority of the home Member State decides in accordance with paragraph 4 not to communicate all the information referred to in paragraph 3 to the competent authority of the host Member State it shall give reasons for its refusal to the CSD concerned within three months of receiving all the information and inform the competent authority of the host Member State of its decision in relation to point (a) of paragraph 6. Where information is shared in response to such a request the competent authority of the host Member State shall not issue the communication referred to in point (a) of paragraph 6.
6.   The CSD may start providing the services referred to in paragraph 2 in the host Member State under the following conditions:
(a)
on receipt of a communication from the competent authority in the host Member State acknowledging receipt by the latter of the communication referred to in paragraph 4 and, where relevant, approving the assessment referred to in point (e) of paragraph 3;
(b)
in the absence of any receipt of a communication, after three months from the date of transmission of the communication referred to in paragraph 4.
7.   In the event of a change in any of the information communicated in accordance with paragraph 3, a CSD shall give written notice of that change to the competent authority of the home Member State at least one month before implementing the change. The competent authority of the host Member State shall also be informed of that change without delay by the competent authority of the home Member State.
