Article 26
General provisions
1.   A CSD shall have robust governance arrangements, which include a clear organisational structure with well-defined, transparent and consistent lines of responsibility, effective processes to identify, manage, monitor and report the risks to which it is or might be exposed, and adequate remuneration policies and internal control mechanisms, including sound administrative and accounting procedures.
2.   A CSD shall adopt policies and procedures which are sufficiently effective so as to ensure compliance with this Regulation, including compliance of its managers and employees with all the provisions of this Regulation.
3.   A CSD shall maintain and operate effective written organisational and administrative arrangements to identify and manage any potential conflicts of interest between itself, including its managers, employees, members of the management body or any person directly or indirectly linked to them, and its participants or their clients. It shall maintain and implement adequate resolution procedures where possible conflicts of interest occur.
4.   A CSD shall make its governance arrangements and the rules governing its activity available to the public.
5.   A CSD shall have appropriate procedures for its employees to report internally potential infringements of this Regulation through a specific channel.
6.   A CSD shall be subject to regular and independent audits. The results of these audits shall be communicated to the management body and made available to the competent authority and, where appropriate taking into account potential conflicts of interest between the members of the user committee and the CSD, to the user committee.
7.   Where a CSD is part of a group of undertakings including other CSDs or credit institutions referred to in Title IV, it shall adopt detailed policies and procedures specifying how the requirements laid down in this Article apply to the group and to the different entities in the group.
8.   ESMA shall, in close cooperation with the members of the ESCB, develop draft regulatory technical standards specifying at the CSD level and at the group level as referred to in paragraph 7:
(a)
the monitoring tools for the risks of the CSDs referred to in paragraph 1;
(b)
the responsibilities of the key personnel in respect of the risks of the CSDs referred to in paragraph 1;
(c)
the potential conflicts of interest referred to in paragraph 3;
(d)
the audit methods referred to in paragraph 6; and
(e)
the circumstances in which it would be appropriate, taking into account potential conflicts of interest between the members of the user committee and the CSD, to share audit findings with the user committee in accordance with paragraph 6.
ESMA shall submit those draft regulatory technical standards to the Commission by 18 June 2015.
Power is delegated to the Commission to adopt the regulatory technical standards referred to in the first subparagraph in accordance with Articles 10 to 14 of Regulation (EU) No 1095/2010.
