Article 60
Supervision of designated credit institutions and CSDs authorised to provide banking-type ancillary services
1.   Without prejudice to Articles 17 and 22 of this Regulation, the competent authorities referred to in point (40) of Article 4(1) of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 are responsible for the authorisation as credit institutions and supervision as credit institutions under the conditions provided in Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 and in Directive 2013/36/EU of the designated credit institutions and CSDs authorised under this Regulation to provide banking-type ancillary services.
The competent authorities referred to in the first subparagraph shall also be responsible for the supervision of designated credit institutions and CSDs referred to in that subparagraph as regards their compliance with the prudential requirements referred to in Article 59 of this Regulation.
The competent authorities referred to in the first subparagraph shall regularly, and at least once a year, assess whether the designated credit institution or CSD authorised to provide banking-type ancillary services complies with Article 59 and shall inform the competent authority of the CSD which shall then inform the authorities referred to in Article 55(4), of the results, including any remedial actions or penalties, of its supervision under this paragraph.
2.   The competent authority of the CSD shall, after consulting competent authorities referred to paragraph 1, review and evaluate at least on an annual basis the following:
(a)
in the case referred to in point (b) of Article 54(2), whether all the necessary arrangements between the designated credit institutions and the CSD allow them to meet their obligations as laid down in this Regulation;
(b)
in the case referred to in point (a) of Article 54(2), whether the arrangements relating to the authorisation to provide banking-type ancillary services allow the CSD to meet its obligations as laid down in this Regulation.
The competent authority of the CSD shall regularly, and at least once a year, inform the authorities referred to in Article 55(4) of the results, including any remedial actions or penalties, of its review and evaluation under this paragraph.
Where a CSD designates an authorised credit institution in accordance with Article 54, in view of the protection of the participants in the securities settlement systems it operates, a CSD shall ensure that it has access from the credit institution it designates to all necessary information for the purpose of this Regulation and it shall report any infringements thereof to the competent authority of the CSD and to competent authorities referred to in paragraph 1.
3.   In order to ensure consistent, efficient and effective supervision within the Union of credit institutions and CSDs authorised to provide banking-type ancillary services, EBA may, in close cooperation with ESMA and the members of the ESCB, issue guidelines addressed to competent authorities in accordance with Article 16 of Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010.
