Whereas:
(1)
Central securities depositories (CSDs), together with central counterparties (CCPs) contribute to a large degree in maintaining post-trade infrastructures that safeguard financial markets and give market participants confidence that securities transactions are executed properly and in a timely manner, including during periods of extreme stress.
(2)
Due to their key position in the settlement process, the securities settlement systems operated by CSDs are of a systemic importance for the functioning of securities markets. Playing an important role in the securities holding systems through which their participants report the securities holdings of investors, the securities settlement systems operated by CSDs also serve as an essential tool to control the integrity of an issue, hindering the undue creation or reduction of issued securities, and thereby play an important role in maintaining investor confidence. Moreover, securities settlement systems operated by CSDs are closely involved in securing collateral for monetary policy operations as well as in securing collateral between credit institutions and are, therefore, important actors in the collateralisation process.
(3)
While Directive 98/26/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (4) reduced the disruption to a securities settlement system caused by insolvency proceedings against a participant in that system, it is necessary to address other risks that securities settlement systems are facing, as well as the risk of insolvency or disruption in the functioning of the CSDs that operate securities settlement systems. A number of CSDs are subject to credit and liquidity risks deriving from the provision of banking services ancillary to settlement.
(4)
The increasing number of cross-border settlements as a consequence of the development of link agreements between CSDs calls into question the resilience, in the absence of common prudential rules, of CSDs when importing the risks encountered by CSDs from other Member States. Moreover, despite the increase in cross-border settlements, market-driven changes towards a more integrated market for CSD services have proven to be very slow. An open internal market in securities settlement should allow any investor in the Union to invest in all Union securities with the same ease as in, and using the same processes as for, domestic securities. However, the settlement markets in the Union remain fragmented across national borders and cross-border settlement remains more costly, due to different national rules regulating settlement and the activities of CSDs and limited competition between CSDs. That fragmentation hinders and creates additional risks and costs for cross-border settlement. Given the systemic relevance of CSDs, competition between them should be promoted so as to enable market participants a choice of provider and reduce reliance on any one infrastructure provider. In the absence of identical obligations for market operators and common prudential standards for CSDs, divergent measures likely to be taken at national level will have a direct negative impact on the safety, efficiency and competition in the settlement markets in the Union. It is necessary to remove those significant obstacles in the functioning of the internal market and avoid distortions of competition and to prevent such obstacles and distortions from arising in the future. The creation of an integrated market for securities settlement with no distinction between national and cross-border securities transactions is needed for the proper functioning of the internal market. Consequently, the appropriate legal basis for this Regulation should be Article 114 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU), as interpreted in accordance with the consistent case law of the Court of Justice of the European Union.
(5)
It is necessary to lay down in a regulation a number of uniform obligations to be imposed on market participants regarding certain aspects of the settlement cycle and discipline and to provide a set of common requirements for CSDs operating securities settlement systems. The directly applicable rules of a regulation should ensure that all market operators and CSDs are subject to identical directly applicable obligations, standards and rules. A regulation should increase the safety and efficiency of settlement in the Union by preventing any diverging national rules as a result of the transposition of a directive. A regulation should reduce the regulatory complexity for market operators and CSDs resulting from different national rules and should allow CSDs to provide their services on a cross-border basis without having to comply with different sets of national requirements such as those concerning the authorisation, supervision, organisation or risks of CSDs. A regulation imposing identical requirements on CSDs should also contribute to eliminating competitive distortions.
(6)
On 20 October 2010, the Financial Stability Board called for more robust core market infrastructures and asked for the revision and enhancement of the existing standards. In April 2012, the Committee on Payments and Settlement Systems (CPSS) of the Bank of International Settlements (BIS) and the International Organisation of Securities Commissions (IOSCO) adopted global standards for financial market infrastructures. Those standards have replaced the BIS recommendations of 2001, which were adapted through non-binding guidelines at European level in 2009 by the European System of Central Banks (ESCB) and the Committee of European Securities Regulators. Taking into account the global nature of financial markets and the systemic importance of CSDs, it is necessary to ensure international convergence of the prudential requirements to which they are subject. This Regulation should follow the existing principles for financial market infrastructures developed by CPSS-IOSCO. The Commission and the European Supervisory Authority (European Securities and Markets Authority) (‘ESMA’), established by Regulation (EU) No 1095/2010 of the European Parliament and of the Council (5), in close cooperation with the members of the ESCB, should ensure consistency with the existing standards and their future developments when drawing up or proposing to revise the regulatory technical standards and the implementing technical standards as well as the guidelines and recommendations referred to in this Regulation.
(7)
The Council, in its conclusions of 2 December 2008, emphasised the need to strengthen the safety and soundness of the securities settlement systems, and to address legal barriers to post-trading in the Union.
(8)
One of the basic tasks of the ESCB is to promote the smooth operation of payment systems. In this respect, the members of the ESCB execute oversight by ensuring efficient and sound clearing and payment systems. The members of the ESCB often act as settlement agents for the cash leg of securities transactions. They are also significant clients of CSDs, which often manage the collateralisation of monetary policy operations. The members of the ESCB should be closely involved, by being consulted, in the authorisation and supervision of CSDs, the recognition of third-country CSDs and the approval of certain CSD links. To prevent the emergence of parallel sets of rules, they should also be closely involved by being consulted in the setting of regulatory and implementing technical standards as well as of guidelines and recommendations although primary responsibility for the setting of such technical standards, guidelines and recommendations should rest with the Commission and ESMA, as laid down in this Regulation. This Regulation should be without prejudice to the responsibilities of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the national central banks to ensure efficient and sound clearing and payment systems within the Union and other countries. This Regulation should not prevent the members of the ESCB from accessing the information relevant for the performance of their duties, including the oversight of CSDs and other financial market infrastructures.
(9)
The members of the ESCB, any other bodies performing similar functions in certain Member States or other public bodies charged with or intervening in the management of the public debt in the Union may themselves provide a number of services, such as operating a securities settlement system, which would qualify them as a CSD. Such entities, when acting as CSDs without establishing a separate entity, should be exempt from the authorisation and supervision requirements, certain organisational requirements and capital and investment policy requirements, but should remain subject to the remaining prudential requirements for CSDs. Where such Member State entities act as CSDs, they should not provide their services in other Member States. Since the members of the ESCB act as settlement agents for the purpose of settlement, they should also be exempt from the requirements set out in Title IV of this Regulation.
(10)
This Regulation should apply to the settlement of transactions in all financial instruments and activities of CSDs unless specified otherwise. This Regulation should also be without prejudice to other legislation of the Union concerning specific financial instruments such as Directive 2003/87/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (6) and measures adopted in accordance with that Directive.
(11)
The recording of securities in book-entry form is an important step towards increasing the efficiency of settlement and ensuring the integrity of a securities issue, especially in a context of increasing complexity of holding and transfer methods. For reasons of safety, this Regulation provides for the recording in book-entry form of all transferable securities admitted to trading or traded on the trading venues regulated by Directive 2014/65/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council (7) and by Regulation (EU) No 600/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council (8). This Regulation should not impose one particular method for the initial book-entry recording, which should be able to take the form of immobilisation or of immediate dematerialisation. This Regulation should not impose the type of institution that is to record securities in book-entry form upon issuance but, rather, should permit different actors, including registrars, to perform that function. However, once transactions in such securities are executed on trading venues regulated by Directive 2014/65/EU and Regulation (EU) No 600/2014 or provided as collateral under the conditions laid down in Directive 2002/47/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (9), such securities should be recorded in a CSD book-entry system in order to ensure, inter alia, that all such securities can be settled in a securities settlement system. Immobilisation and dematerialisation should not imply any loss of rights for the holders of securities and should be achieved in a way that ensures that holders of securities can verify their rights.
(12)
In order to ensure the safety of settlement, any participant in a securities settlement system buying or selling certain financial instruments, namely transferable securities, money-market instruments, units in collective investment undertakings and emission allowances, should settle its obligation on the intended settlement date.
(13)
Longer settlement periods for transactions in transferable securities cause uncertainty and increased risk for securities settlement systems participants. Different durations of settlement periods across Member States hamper reconciliation and are sources of errors for issuers, investors and intermediaries. It is therefore necessary to provide a common settlement period which would facilitate the identification of the intended settlement date and facilitate the implementation of settlement discipline measures. The intended settlement date of transactions in transferable securities which are executed on trading venues regulated by Directive 2014/65/EU and Regulation (EU) No 600/2014 should be no later than on the second business day after the trading takes place. For complex operations composed of several transactions such as securities repurchase or lending agreements, that requirement should apply to the first transaction involving a transfer of securities. Given their non-standardised character, that requirement should not apply to transactions that are negotiated privately by the relevant parties, but executed on the trading venues regulated by Directive 2014/65/EU and Regulation (EU) No 600/2014 or to transactions that are executed bilaterally, but reported to a trading venue regulated by Directive 2014/65/EU and Regulation (EU) No 600/2014. Moreover, that requirement should not apply to the first transaction where the transferable securities concerned are subject to initial recording in book-entry form.
(14)
CSDs and other market infrastructures should take measures to prevent and address settlement fails. It is essential that such rules be uniformly and directly applied in the Union. In particular, CSDs and other market infrastructures should be required to put in place procedures enabling them to take appropriate measures to suspend any participant that systematically causes settlement fails and to disclose its identity to the public, provided that that participant has the opportunity to submit observations before such a decision is taken.
(15)
One of the most efficient ways to address settlement fails is to require failing participants to be subject to a compulsory enforcement of the original agreement. This Regulation should provide for uniform rules concerning penalties and certain aspects of the buy-in transaction for all transferable securities, money-market instruments, units in collective investment undertakings and emission allowances, such as timing and pricing. Those rules should be adapted to the specificities of different securities markets, certain trading venues such as SME growth markets as defined in Directive 2014/65/EU and certain complex operations such as very short-term securities repurchase or lending agreements, in order to avoid adversely impacting on the liquidity and efficiency of securities markets. The rules on settlement discipline should be applied in a manner that provides an incentive for the settlement of transactions in all relevant financial instruments by their intended settlement date.
(16)
The procedures and penalties relating to settlement fails should be commensurate with the scale and seriousness of such fails whilst being scaled in such a way that maintains and protects the liquidity of the relevant financial instruments. In particular, market-making activities play a crucial role in providing liquidity to markets within the Union, particularly to less liquid securities. Measures to prevent and address settlement fails should be balanced against the need to maintain and protect liquidity in those securities. Cash penalties imposed on failing participants should, where possible, be credited to the non-failing clients as compensation and should not, in any event, become a source of revenue for the CSD concerned. CSDs should consult the market infrastructures in respect of which they provide CSD services on the implementation of settlement discipline measures laid down in this Regulation.
(17)
In most cases a buy-in process should be initiated where the financial instruments are not delivered within four business days of the intended settlement date. However, for illiquid financial instruments it is appropriate that the period before initiating the buy-in process should be increased to a maximum of seven business days. The basis for determining when financial instruments are deemed to be illiquid should be established through regulatory technical standards, taking account of the assessments already made in Regulation (EU) No 600/2014. Where such a determination is made the extension of the deadline for initiating the buy-in process should be up to seven business days.
(18)
It is appropriate to allow SME growth markets the flexibility not to apply the buy-in process until up to 15 days after the trade has taken place so as to take into account the liquidity of such markets and to allow, in particular, for activity by market-makers in those less liquid markets. The settlement discipline measures specific to SME growth markets should apply only to transactions executed on such markets. As identified in the Commission Staff Working Paper of 7 December 2011 accompanying the Commission communication entitled, ‘An action plan to improve access to finance for SMEs’, access to capital markets should be developed as an alternative to bank lending to SMEs and it is therefore appropriate to tailor the rules to better serve the needs of those SME growth markets.
(19)
CSDs should be allowed to monitor the execution of a buy-in with respect to multiple settlement instructions on the same financial instruments and with the same date of expiry of the extension period with the aim of minimising the number of buy-ins to the extent compatible with the requirements of this Regulation.
(20)
As the main purpose of this Regulation is to introduce a number of legal obligations imposed directly on market operators consisting, inter alia, of the recording in book-entry form in CSDs of all transferable securities once such securities are traded on trading venues regulated by Directive 2014/65/EU and Regulation (EU) No 600/2014 or provided as collateral under the conditions of Directive 2002/47/EC and in the settling of their obligations no later than on the second business day after trading takes place and as CSDs are responsible for the operation of securities settlement systems and the application of measures to provide timely settlement in the Union, it is essential to ensure that all CSDs are safe and sound and comply at all times with stringent organisational, conduct of business and prudential requirements laid down in this Regulation, including by taking all reasonable steps to mitigate fraud and negligence. Uniform and directly applicable rules regarding the authorisation and ongoing supervision of CSDs are therefore an essential corollary of and are interrelated with the legal obligations imposed on market participants by this Regulation. It is, therefore, necessary to include rules regarding the authorisation and supervision of CSDs in the same act as the legal obligations imposed on market participants.
(21)
Taking into account that CSDs should be subject to common requirements and in order to dismantle the existing barriers to cross-border settlement, any authorised CSDs should enjoy the freedom to provide services within the territory of the Union, including through setting up a branch. In order to ensure an appropriate level of safety in the provision of services by CSDs in another Member State, such CSDs should be subject to a specific procedure laid down in this Regulation where they intend to provide certain core services as provided for in this Regulation or set up a branch in a host Member State.
(22)
Within a borderless Union settlement market, it is necessary to establish the competences of the different authorities involved in the application of this Regulation. Member States should specifically designate the competent authorities responsible for the application of this Regulation, which should be afforded the supervisory and investigatory powers necessary for the exercise of their functions. A CSD should be subject to authorisation and supervision by the competent authority of its home Member State, which is well placed and should be empowered to examine how CSDs operate on a daily basis, to carry out regular reviews and to take appropriate action when necessary. The competent authority concerned should however consult at the earliest stage and cooperate with other relevant authorities, which include the authorities responsible for the oversight of each securities settlement system operated by the CSD, the central banks that issue the most relevant settlement currencies, where applicable, the relevant central banks that act as settlement agent for each securities settlement system, and, also, where applicable, the competent authorities of other group entities. Such cooperation also implies exchanges of information between the authorities concerned and the immediate notification of those authorities in the case of an emergency situation affecting the liquidity and stability of the financial system in any of the Member States where the CSD or any of its participants is established.
(23)
Where a CSD provides its services in another Member State, the competent authority of the host Member State should be able to request from the competent authority of the home Member State all information concerning the activities of the CSD that is of relevance to the requesting authority. In order to enable effective coordination of supervision, that information could concern in particular the services provided to CSD users established in the host Member State or the instruments or currencies processed and may include information on adverse developments, results of risk assessments and remedial measures. The competent authority of the home Member State should also have access to any information periodically reported by the CSD to the competent authority of the host Member State.
(24)
Where a CSD provides its services in a Member State other than the Member State where it is established, including through setting up a branch, the competent authority of its home Member State is mainly responsible for the supervision of that CSD. When the activities of a CSD in a host Member State have become of substantial importance for the functioning of the securities markets and the protection of the investors in that host Member State, the competent authorities and relevant authorities of the home Member State and of the host Member State should establish cooperation arrangements for the supervision of the activities of that CSD in the host Member State. The competent authority of the home Member State should also be able to decide that those cooperation arrangements envisage multilateral cooperation, including cooperation of a collegial nature, between the competent authority of the home Member State and the competent authorities and relevant authorities of the host Member States concerned. Such cooperation arrangements, however, should not be considered to be colleges of supervisors as referred to in Regulation (EU) No 1095/2010. No Member State or group of Member States should be discriminated against directly or indirectly, as a location for CSD and settlement services. While performing its duties under this Regulation no authority should directly or indirectly discriminate against any undertaking from another Member State. Subject to this Regulation, a CSD from one Member State should not be restricted in or prevented from settling financial instruments in the currency of another Member State or in the currency of a third country.
(25)
This Regulation should not prevent Member States from requiring in their national law a specific legal framework for day-to-day cooperation at national level between the competent authority of the CSD and relevant authorities. Such a national legal framework should be consistent with the guidelines concerning supervisory practices and cooperation between authorities that ESMA may issue under this Regulation.
(26)
Any legal person falling within the scope of the definition of a CSD needs to be authorised by the competent national authorities before starting its activities. Taking into account different business models, a CSD should be defined by reference to certain core services, which consist of settlement, implying the operation of a securities settlement system, notary and central securities accounts maintenance services. A CSD should at least operate a securities settlement system and provide one other core service. This combination is essential for CSDs to play their role in securities settlement and in ensuring the integrity of a securities issue. Entities that do not operate securities settlement systems such as registrars, transfer agents, public authorities, bodies in charge of a registry system established under Directive 2003/87/EC, or CCPs that are regulated by Regulation (EU) No 648/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council (10) do not fall within the scope of the definition of a CSD.
(27)
CSDs should have in place recovery plans to ensure continuity of their critical operations. Without prejudice to Directive 2014/59/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council (11), the competent authorities should ensure that an adequate resolution plan is established and maintained for each CSD in accordance with the relevant national law.
(28)
In order to provide reliable data on the scale of securities settlement outside securities settlement systems and to ensure that the risks arising can be monitored and addressed, any institutions other than CSDs that settle securities transactions outside a securities settlement system should report their settlement activities to the competent authorities concerned. The recipient competent authorities should subsequently transmit that information to ESMA and should inform ESMA of any potential risk resulting from such settlement activities. Furthermore, ESMA should monitor such settlement activities and take into account the potential risks that they might create.
(29)
In order to avoid any risk-taking by CSDs in activities other than those subject to authorisation under this Regulation, the activities of authorised CSDs should be limited to the provision of services covered by their authorisation or notified under this Regulation and they should not hold any participation, as defined in this Regulation by reference to the Directive 2013/34/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council (12), or any ownership, direct or indirect, of 20 % or more of the voting rights or capital in any institutions other than those providing similar services unless such a participation is approved by CSDs’ competent authorities on the basis that it does not significantly increase the CSDs’ risk profile.
(30)
In order to ensure the safe functioning of the securities settlement systems, they should be operated only by the CSDs or by central banks acting as CSDs, subject to this Regulation.
(31)
Without prejudice to specific requirements of Member State tax law, CSDs should be authorised to provide services ancillary to their core services that contribute to enhancing the safety, efficiency and transparency of the securities markets and that do not create undue risks to their core services. A non-exhaustive list of those services is set out in this Regulation in order to enable CSDs to respond to future market developments. Where the provision of such services relates to withholding and reporting obligations to the tax authorities, it will continue to be carried out in accordance with the law of the Member States concerned. In accordance with Article 114(2) TFEU, the power to adopt measures under Article 114(1) does not apply to fiscal provisions. In its judgement of 29 April 2004 in Case C-338/01 Commission v Council (13), the Court of Justice of the European Union held that the words ‘fiscal provisions’ are to be interpreted as ‘covering not only the provisions determining taxable persons, taxable transactions, the basis of imposition, and rates of and exemptions from direct and indirect taxes, but also those relating to arrangements for the collection of such taxes.’ This Regulation does not therefore cover arrangements for the collection of taxes for which a different legal basis would need to be used.
(32)
A CSD intending to outsource a core service to a third party or to provide a new core service or an ancillary service not listed in this Regulation, to operate another securities settlement system, to use another settlement agent or to set up any CSD links that involve significant risks should apply for authorisation following the same procedure as that required for initial authorisation, save that the competent authority should inform the applicant CSD within three months whether authorisation has been granted or refused. However, CSD links not involving significant risks or interoperable links of CSDs that outsource their services relating to those interoperable links to public entities, such as the members of the ESCB, should not be subject to prior authorisation, but should be notified by the relevant CSDs to their competent authorities.
(33)
Where a CSD intends to extend its services to non-banking type ancillary services explicitly listed in this Regulation which do not entail an increase in its risk profile, it should be able to do so following notification to the competent authority of its home Member State.
(34)
CSDs established in third countries should be able to offer their services in the Union, including through the setting-up of a branch. In order to ensure an appropriate level of safety in the provision of CSD services by third-country CSDs, such CSDs should be subject to recognition by ESMA where they intend to provide certain services listed in this Regulation or to set up a branch in the Union. Third-country CSDs should be able to set up links with CSDs established in the Union in the absence of such recognition provided that the relevant competent authority does not object. In view of the global nature of financial markets, ESMA is best placed to recognise third-country CSDs. ESMA should be able to recognise third-country CSDs only if the Commission concludes that they are subject to a legal and supervisory framework effectively equivalent to the one provided in this Regulation, if they are effectively authorised, supervised and subject to oversight in their country of establishment and cooperation arrangements have been established between ESMA, the competent authorities and relevant authorities of CSDs. Recognition by ESMA should be subject to an effective equivalent recognition of the prudential framework applicable to CSDs established in the Union and authorised under this Regulation.
(35)
Taking into account the complexity as well as the systemic nature of the CSDs and of the services they provide, transparent governance rules should ensure that senior management, members of the management body, shareholders and participants, who are in a position to exercise control, as defined by reference to the Directive 2013/34/EU, over the operation of the CSD are suitable to ensure the sound and prudent management of the CSD.
(36)
Different governance structures are used across Member States. In most cases a unitary or a dual board structure is used. The definitions used in this Regulation are intended to embrace all existing structures without advocating any particular structure. They are purely functional for the purpose of setting out rules aiming to achieve a particular outcome irrespective of the national company law applicable to an institution in each Member State. The definitions should therefore not interfere with the general allocation of competences in accordance with national company law.
(37)
Transparent governance rules should ensure that the interests of the shareholders, the management and staff of the CSD, on the one hand, and the interests of their users whom CSDs are ultimately serving, on the other, are taken into account. Those governance rules should apply without prejudice to the ownership model adopted by the CSD. User committees should be established for each securities settlement system operated by the CSD to give users the opportunity to advise the management body of the CSD on the key issues that impact them and should be given the tools to perform their role. The interests of different users of CSDs, including those of holders of different types of securities, should be represented in the user committee.
(38)
CSDs should be able to outsource the operation of their services provided that the risks arising from such outsourcing arrangements are managed. Taking into account the significance of the tasks entrusted to CSDs, this Regulation should provide that CSDs do not transfer their responsibilities to third parties through the outsourcing by contract of their activities to third parties. Outsourcing of such activities should be subject to strict conditions that maintain the responsibility of CSDs for their activities and ensure that the supervision and oversight of the CSDs are not impaired. It should be possible to exempt outsourcing by a CSD of its activities to a public entity from those requirements under certain conditions.
(39)
This Regulation should not prevent Member States allowing direct securities holding systems from providing in their national law that parties other than CSDs shall or may perform certain functions, which in some other types of securities holding systems are typically performed by CSDs and specifying how those functions should be exercised. In particular, in some Member States account operators or participants in the securities settlement systems operated by CSDs record entries into securities accounts maintained by CSDs without necessarily being account providers themselves. In view of the need for legal certainty on the entries made into accounts at the CSD level, the specific role played by such other parties should be recognised by this Regulation. It should therefore be possible, under specific circumstances and subject to strict rules laid down by law, to share the responsibility between a CSD and the relevant other party or to provide for exclusive responsibility by that other party for certain aspects related to maintaining of securities accounts at the top tier level provided that such other party is subject to appropriate regulation and supervision. There should be no restrictions on the extent to which responsibility is shared.
(40)
Conduct of business rules should provide transparency in the relations between CSDs and their users. In particular, CSDs should have publicly disclosed, transparent, objective and non-discriminatory criteria for participation in the securities settlement system, which would allow restriction of access by participants only on the basis of the risks involved. A quick and appropriate remedy should be made available to competent authorities to address any unjustified refusal of CSDs to provide their services to participants. CSDs should publicly disclose prices and fees for their services. In order to provide open and non-discriminatory access to their services and in view of the significant market power that CSDs still enjoy in the territory of their respective Member States, CSDs should not be able to diverge from their published pricing policy for their core services and should maintain separate accounts for the costs and revenues associated with each of their core services and with their ancillary services. Those participation provisions complement and reinforce the right of market participants to use a settlement system in another Member State provided for in Directive 2014/65/EU.
(41)
In order to facilitate efficient recording, settlement and payment, CSDs should accommodate in their communication procedures with participants and with the market infrastructures they interface with, the relevant international open communication procedures and standards for messaging and reference data.
(42)
Taking into account the central role of securities settlement systems in the financial markets, CSDs should, when providing their services, make best efforts to ensure the timely settlement of securities transactions and the integrity of the securities issue. This Regulation should not interfere with the national law of the Member States regulating the holdings of securities and the arrangements maintaining the integrity of securities issues. However, in order to enhance the protection of the assets of their participants and those of their clients, this Regulation should require CSDs to segregate the securities accounts maintained for each participant and offer, upon request, further segregation of the accounts of the participants’ clients which in some cases might be available only at a higher cost to be borne by the participants’ clients requesting further segregation. CSDs and their participants should be required to provide for both omnibus client segregation and individual client segregation so clients can choose the level of segregation they believe is appropriate to their needs.
The only exclusion from this should be where due to other public policy requirements, in particular in relation to efficient and transparent collection of taxation, a CSD and its participants are required to provide individual client segregation for citizens and residents of and legal persons established in a Member State where, at the date of entry into force of this Regulation, such individual client segregation is required under the national law of the Member State under which the securities are constituted and only for citizens, residents of and legal persons established in that Member State. CSDs should ensure that those requirements apply separately to each securities settlement system operated by them. Without prejudice to the provision of ancillary services, CSDs should not use on their own account any securities that belong to a participant unless explicitly authorised by that participant and should not otherwise use on their own account the securities that do not belong to them. In addition the CSD should require the participants to obtain any necessary prior consent from their clients.
(43)
Directive 98/26/EC provides that transfer orders entered into securities settlement systems in accordance with the rules of those systems should be legally enforceable and binding on third parties. However, since Directive 98/26/EC does not specifically refer to CSDs that operate securities settlement systems, for clarity, this Regulation should require CSDs to define the moment or moments when transfer orders are entered into their systems and become irrevocable in accordance with the rules of that Directive. In addition, in order to increase legal certainty, CSDs should disclose to their participants the moment when the transfer of securities and cash in a securities settlement system is legally enforceable and binding on third parties in accordance, as the case may be, with national law. CSDs should also take all reasonable steps to ensure that transfers of securities and cash are legally enforceable and binding on third parties no later than at the end of the business day of the actual settlement date.
(44)
In order to avoid settlement risks due to the insolvency of the settlement agent, a CSD should settle, whenever practical and available, the cash leg of the securities transaction through accounts opened with a central bank. If this option is not practical and available, a CSD should be able to settle through accounts opened with a credit institution established under the conditions provided in Directive 2013/36/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council (14) and subject to a specific authorisation procedure and prudential requirements provided in Title IV of this Regulation.
(45)
Banking services ancillary to settlement involving credit and liquidity risks should only be undertaken by CSDs or outsourced to entities authorised to provide the banking services ancillary to the CSD activities as laid down in this Regulation.
(46)
In order to secure efficiencies resulting from the provision of both CSD and banking services within the same group of undertakings, the requirements of this Regulation should not prevent credit institutions from belonging to the same group of undertakings as the CSD. It is appropriate to provide for arrangements under which CSDs could be authorised to provide to their participants and to other entities ancillary services from within the same legal entity or from within a separate legal entity which may be part of the same group of undertakings ultimately controlled by the same parent undertaking or not. Where a credit institution other than a central bank acts as a settlement agent, the credit institution should be able to provide to the CSD participants the services set out in this Regulation, which are covered by the authorisation, but should not provide other banking services from the same legal entity in order to limit the settlement system’s exposure to the risks resulting from the failure of the credit institution.
(47)
Since Directive 2013/36/EU does not specifically address intra-day credit and liquidity risks resulting from the provision of banking services ancillary to settlement, credit institutions and CSDs providing such services should also be subject to specific enhanced credit and liquidity risk mitigation requirements, including a risk-based capital surcharge which reflects the relevant risks. Such enhanced credit and liquidity risk mitigation requirements should follow the global standards for financial market infrastructures and the principles for ‘Monitoring tools for intra-day liquidity management’ published in April 2013 by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision.
(48)
Some CSDs also operating as credit institutions are subject to own funds and reporting requirements relevant for credit institutions and laid down in Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council (15) and in Directive 2013/36/EU. Given the systemic importance of such CSDs it is appropriate that the strictest requirements provided in Union law apply in order to avoid the cumulative application of various Union rules, for example in relation to the reporting of own funds requirements. In any areas where potential duplication of requirements is identified, the European Supervisory Authority (European Banking Authority) (‘EBA’) established by Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010 of the European Parliament and of the Council (16) and ESMA should provide an opinion on the appropriate application of the Union acts in accordance with Article 34 of Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010 and of Regulation (EU) No 1095/2010.
(49)
In addition to the own funds requirements provided for in Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 and in Directive 2013/36/EU, credit institutions and CSDs should be subject to a capital surcharge that reflects the risks, such as credit and liquidity risks, resulting from the provision of intra-day credit, inter alia, to the participants in a securities settlement system or other users of CSD services.
(50)
In order to ensure full compliance with specific measures aimed at mitigating credit and liquidity risks, the competent authorities should be able to require CSDs to designate more than one credit institution whenever they can demonstrate, based on the available evidence, that the exposures of one credit institution to the concentration of credit and liquidity risks is not fully mitigated. CSDs should also be able to designate more than one credit institution.
(51)
Supervision of the compliance of designated credit institutions or CSDs authorised to provide banking services ancillary to settlement with the requirements of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 and of Directive 2013/36/EU and the specific relevant prudential requirements of this Regulation should be entrusted to the competent authorities referred to in Regulation (EU) No 575/2013. In order to ensure consistent application of supervisory standards, it is desirable that the banking services of CSDs which are of a scale and nature to pose a significant risk to the financial stability of the Union are directly supervised by the ECB under the conditions provided for in Council Regulation (EU) No 1024/2013 (17) concerning policies relating to the prudential supervision of credit institutions. This Regulation should be without prejudice to Regulation (EU) No 1024/2013.
(52)
A credit institution or a CSD authorised to provide banking services ancillary to settlement should comply with any present or future Union legislation applicable to credit institutions. This Regulation should be without prejudice to Directive 2014/59/EU and any future Union legislative act regarding the framework for the recovery and resolution of credit institutions, investment firms and other financial institutions.
(53)
In order to provide a sufficient degree of safety and continuity of services provided by CSDs, CSDs should be subject to specific uniform and directly applicable prudential and capital requirements which mitigate their legal, operational and investment risks.
(54)
The safety of the link arrangements set up between CSDs should be subject to specific requirements to enable the access of their respective participants to other securities settlement systems. The provision of banking-type ancillary services from within a separate legal entity should not prevent CSDs from receiving such services, in particular when they are participants in a securities settlement system operated by another CSD. It is particularly important that any potential risks resulting from the link arrangements such as credit, liquidity, organisational or any other relevant risks for CSDs are fully mitigated. For interoperable links, it is important that linked securities settlement systems have identical moments of entry of transfer orders into the system and irrevocability of such transfer orders and use equivalent rules concerning the moment of finality of transfers of securities and cash. The same principles should apply to CSDs that use a common settlement information technology (IT) infrastructure.
(55)
In order to allow competent authorities to supervise the activities of CSDs effectively, CSDs should be subject to strict record-keeping requirements. CSDs should maintain for at least 10 years all the records and data on all the services that they may provide, including transaction data on collateral management services that involve the processing of securities repurchase or lending agreements. CSDs might need to specify a common format in which their clients provide transaction data so as to allow this record-keeping requirement to be met, in conformity with any relevant regulatory and implementing technical standards adopted under this Regulation.
(56)
In many Member States issuers are required by national law to issue certain types of securities, notably shares, within their national CSDs. In order to remove this barrier to the smooth functioning of the Union post-trading market and to allow issuers to opt for the most efficient way of managing their securities, issuers should have the right to choose any CSD established in the Union for recording their securities and receiving any relevant CSD services. Since harmonisation of national corporate law is beyond the scope of this Regulation, such national corporate or similar law under which the securities are constituted should continue to apply and arrangements be made to ensure that the requirements of such national corporate or similar law can be met where the right of choice of CSD is exercised. Such national corporate and similar law under which the securities are constituted govern the relationship between their issuer and holders or any third parties, and their respective rights and duties attached to the securities such as voting rights, dividends and corporate actions. A refusal to provide services to an issuer should be permissible only based on a comprehensive risk assessment or if that CSD does not provide any issuance services in relation to securities constituted under the corporate or similar law of the relevant Member State. A quick and appropriate remedy should be made available to competent authorities to address any unjustified refusal of CSDs to provide their services to issuers.
(57)
In view of the increasing cross-border holdings and transfers of securities enhanced by this Regulation, it is of the utmost urgency and importance to establish clear rules on the law applicable to proprietary aspects in relation to the securities held in the accounts maintained by CSDs. Nevertheless, this is a horizontal issue which goes beyond the scope of this Regulation and could be dealt with in future Union legislative acts.
(58)
The European Code of Conduct for Clearing and Settlement of 7 November 2006 created a voluntary framework to enable access between CSDs and other market infrastructures. However, the post-trade sector remains fragmented along national lines, making cross-border trade unnecessarily costly. It is necessary to lay down uniform conditions for links between CSDs and of access between CSDs and other market infrastructures. In order to enable CSDs to offer their participants access to other markets, they should have a right to become a participant in another CSD or request another CSD to develop special functions for having access to the latter. Such access should be granted on fair, reasonable and non-discriminatory terms and should be refused only where it threatens the smooth and orderly functioning of the financial markets or causes systemic risk. A quick and appropriate remedy should be made available to competent authorities to address any unjustified refusal of a CSD to grant access to another CSD. Where CSD links introduce significant risks for settlement, they should be subject to authorisation and increased supervision by the relevant competent authorities.
(59)
CSDs should also have access to transaction feeds from a CCP or a trading venue and those market infrastructures should have access to the securities settlement systems operated by CSDs. Such access may be refused only where it threatens the smooth and orderly functioning of the financial markets or causes systemic risk and may not be denied on the grounds of loss of market share.
(60)
A quick and appropriate remedy should be made available to competent authorities to address any unjustified refusal of CSDs or market infrastructures to provide access to their services. This Regulation completes the access arrangements between trading venues, CCPs, and CSDs as laid down in Regulation (EU) No 648/2012 and in Regulation (EU) No 600/2014 necessary to establish a competitive internal market in post-trade services. ESMA and the Commission should continue to monitor closely the evolution of post-trade infrastructure and the Commission should, where necessary, intervene in order to prevent competitive distortions from occurring in the internal market.
(61)
A sound prudential and conduct of business framework for the financial sector should rest on strong supervisory and sanctioning regimes. To that end, supervisory authorities should be equipped with sufficient powers to act and should be able to rely on deterrent sanctioning regimes to be used against any unlawful conduct. A review of existing sanctioning powers and their practical application aiming to promote convergence of sanctions across the range of supervisory activities has been carried out in the Commission Communication of 8 December 2010 entitled ‘Reinforcing sanctioning regimes in the financial services sector’.
(62)
Therefore, in order to ensure effective compliance by CSDs, credit institutions designated as settlement agents, the members of their management bodies and any other persons who effectively control their business or any other persons with the requirements of this Regulation, competent authorities should be able to apply administrative sanctions and other measures which are effective, proportionate and dissuasive.
(63)
In order to provide deterrence and consistent application of the sanctions across Member States, this Regulation should provide a list of key administrative sanctions and other measures that need to be available to the competent authorities, for the power to impose those sanctions and other measures on all persons, whether legal or natural, responsible for an infringement, for a list of key criteria when determining the level and type of those sanctions and other measures and for levels of administrative pecuniary sanctions. Administrative fines should take into account factors such as any identified financial benefit resulting from the infringement, the gravity and duration of the infringement, any aggravating or mitigating factors, the need for administrative fines to have a deterrent effect and, where appropriate, include a discount for cooperation with the competent authority. The adoption and publication of sanctions should respect fundamental rights as laid down in the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union (‘the Charter’), in particular the rights to respect for private and family life (Article 7), the right to the protection of personal data (Article 8) and the right to an effective remedy and to a fair trial (Article 47).
(64)
In order to detect potential infringements, effective mechanisms to encourage reporting of potential or actual infringements of this Regulation to the competent authorities should be put in place. Those mechanisms should include adequate safeguards for the persons who report potential or actual infringements of this Regulation and the persons accused of such infringements. Appropriate procedures should be established to comply with the accused person’s right to protection of personal data, with the right of defence and to be heard before the adoption of a final decision affecting that person as well as with the right to seek effective remedy before a tribunal against any decision or measure affecting that person.
(65)
This Regulation should be without prejudice to any provisions in the law of Member States relating to criminal sanctions.
(66)
Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (18) governs the processing of personal data carried out in the Member States pursuant to this Regulation. Any exchange or transmission of personal data by competent authorities of the Member States should be undertaken in accordance with the rules on the transfer of personal data as laid down in Directive 95/46/EC. Regulation (EC) No 45/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council (19) governs the processing of personal data carried out by ESMA pursuant to this Regulation. Any exchange or transmission of personal data carried out by ESMA should be in accordance with the rules on the transfer of personal data as laid down in Regulation (EC) No 45/2001.
(67)
This Regulation complies with the fundamental rights and observes the principles recognised in particular by the Charter, notably the rights to respect for private and family life, the right to the protection of personal data, the right to an effective remedy and to a fair trial, the right not to be tried or punished twice for the same offence, and the freedom to conduct a business, and has to be applied in accordance with those rights and principles.
(68)
ESMA should play a central role in the application of this Regulation by ensuring consistent application of Union rules by national competent authorities and by settling disagreements between them.
(69)
ESMA should submit annual reports to the Commission assessing the trends and potential risks in the markets covered by this Regulation. Those reports should include at least an assessment of settlement efficiency, internalised settlement, cross-border provision of services, the reasons for the rejection of access rights and any other substantive barriers to competition in post-trade financial services including any barriers arising from the inappropriate use of licensing arrangements, appropriateness of penalties for settlement fails, in particular the need for additional flexibility in relation to penalties for settlement fails in relation to illiquid financial instruments, the application of Member States’ rules on civil liability to losses attributable to CSDs, the conditions relating to the provision of banking-type ancillary services, requirements regarding the protection of securities of participants and those of their clients, and the sanctions regime and may contain, where necessary, recommendations of preventative or remedial actions. ESMA should also conduct peer reviews covering the activities of the competent authorities under this Regulation within an appropriate time-frame and in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 1095/2010. Given the systemic importance of CSDs and the fact that they are being regulated for the first time at Union level, it is appropriate to require that such peer reviews should initially occur every three years at least in relation to the supervision of CSDs which make use of the freedom to provide services or participate in an interoperable link.
(70)
As a body with highly specialised expertise regarding securities and securities markets, it is efficient and appropriate to entrust ESMA with the development of draft regulatory and implementing technical standards which do not involve policy choices, for submission to the Commission. Where specified, ESMA should also closely cooperate with the members of the ESCB and EBA.
(71)
The Commission should be empowered to adopt regulatory technical standards in accordance with Article 290 TFEU and with Articles 10 to 14 of Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010 and of Regulation (EU) No 1095/2010 with regard to the detailed elements of the settlement discipline measures; the reporting of internalised settlement; information and other elements to be included by a CSD in its application for authorisation; conditions under which the competent authorities of CSDs may approve their participations in the capital of certain legal entities, the information that different authorities shall supply each other when supervising CSDs; the information that the applicant CSD shall provide ESMA in its application for recognition; the elements of the governance arrangements for CSDs; the details of the records to be kept by CSDs; the risks to be taken into account by CSDs when carrying out a comprehensive risk assessment, and competent authorities assessing the reasons for refusal of requests for access; the elements of the procedure for access of participants and issuers to CSDs, access between CSDs and between CSDs and other market infrastructures; the details of the measures to be taken by CSDs so that the integrity of the issue is maintained; the mitigation of the operational and investment risks and of the risks derived from the CSD links; the details of the capital requirements for CSDs; the details of the application for authorisation to provide banking-type ancillary services; the capital surcharge and the prudential requirements on credit and liquidity risks for CSDs and designated credit institutions that are authorised to provide banking-type ancillary services.
(72)
The Commission should also be empowered to adopt implementing technical standards by means of implementing acts pursuant to Article 291 TFEU and in accordance with Article 15 of Regulation (EU) No 1095/2010 with regard to standard forms and templates for reporting on internalised settlement; for the application for authorisation by CSDs; for the provision of information between different competent authorities for the purposes of supervision of CSDs; for the relevant cooperation arrangements between authorities of home and host Member States; for formats of records to be kept by CSDs; for the procedures in cases where a participant or an issuer is denied access to a CSD, CSDs are denied access between themselves or between CSDs and other market infrastructures; and for the consultation of different authorities prior to granting authorisation to a settlement agent.
(73)
In order to attain the objectives set out in this Regulation, the power to adopt acts in accordance with Article 290 of the TFEU should be delegated to the Commission in respect of specific details concerning some definitions, parameters for the calculation of cash penalties for the participants that cause settlement fails, the criteria under which the operations of a CSD in a host Member State should be considered to be of substantial importance for that Member State. It is of particular importance that the Commission carry out appropriate consultations during its preparatory work, including at expert level. The Commission, when preparing and drawing up delegated acts, should ensure a simultaneous, timely and appropriate transmission of relevant documents to the European Parliament and to the Council.
(74)
In order to ensure uniform conditions for the implementation of this Regulation, implementing powers should be conferred on the Commission to take decisions on the assessment of rules from third countries for the purposes of recognition of third-country CSDs. Those powers should be exercised in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council (20).
(75)
When assessing the relevant rules of third countries, a proportionate, outcomes-based approach should be taken, focusing on compliance with applicable Union rules and, where relevant, international standards. Conditional or interim recognition may also be granted where there are no areas of substantive difference that would have foreseeable detrimental effects on Union markets.
(76)
Since the objectives of this Regulation, namely to lay down uniform requirements for settlement as well as for CSDs, cannot be sufficiently achieved by the Member States and can therefore, by reason of the scale of the action, be better achieved at Union level, the Union may adopt measures, in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity as set out in Article 5 of the Treaty on European Union. In accordance with the principle of proportionality, as set out in that Article, this Regulation does not go beyond what is necessary in order to achieve those objectives.
(77)
It is necessary to amend Directive 98/26/EC to bring it in line with the Directive 2010/78/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council (21), whereby designated securities settlement systems are no longer notified to the Commission but to ESMA.
(78)
Taking into account the fact that this Regulation harmonises at Union level the measures to prevent and address settlement fails and has a wider scope of application for such measures than Regulation (EU) No 236/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council (22), it is necessary to repeal Article 15 of that Regulation.
(79)
CSDs should be exempt from the application of Directive 2014/65/EU and Regulation (EU) No 600/2014 where they provide services that are explicitly listed in this Regulation. However, in order to ensure that any entities providing investment services and activities are subject to Directive 2014/65/EU and Regulation (EU) No 600/2014 and to avoid competitive distortions between different types of providers of such services, it is necessary to require CSDs that provide investment services and activities in the course of their ancillary services to be subject to the requirements of Directive 2014/65/EU and Regulation (EU) No 600/2014.
(80)
The application of the authorisation and recognition requirements of this Regulation should be deferred in order to provide CSDs established in the Union or in third countries with sufficient time to apply for authorisation and recognition of their activities provided for in this Regulation. Until a decision is made under this Regulation on the authorisation or recognition of CSDs and of their activities, including CSD links, the respective national rules on authorisation and recognition of CSDs should continue to apply.
(81)
It is also necessary to defer the application of the requirements concerning settlement discipline and requirements concerning reporting obligation of settlement internalisers until all the necessary delegated or implementing acts further specifying such requirements are in place, and of the requirements for recording certain transferable securities in book-entry form and settling obligations in securities settlement systems no later than on the second business day after the trading in order to provide market participants, holding securities in paper form or using longer settlement periods, with sufficient time to comply with those requirements,
HAVE ADOPTED THIS REGULATION:
