Article 46
Assurance undertakings not complying with the legal provisions
1.   Any assurance undertaking carrying on business under the right of establishment or the freedom to provide services shall submit to the competent authorities of the Member State of the branch and/or of the Member State of the provision of services all documents requested of it for the purposes of this Article in so far as assurance undertakings the head office of which is in those Member States are also obliged to do so.
2.   If the competent authorities of a Member State establish that an assurance undertaking with a branch or carrying on business under the freedom to provide services in its territory is not complying with the legal provisions applicable to it in that State, they shall require the assurance undertaking concerned to remedy that irregular situation.
3.   If the assurance undertaking in question fails to take the necessary action, the competent authorities of the Member State concerned shall inform the competent authorities of the home Member State accordingly. The latter authorities shall, at the earliest opportunity, take all appropriate measures to ensure that the assurance undertaking concerned remedies that irregular situation. The nature of those measures shall be communicated to the competent authorities of the Member State concerned.
4.   If, despite the measures taken by the home Member State or because those measures prove inadequate or are lacking in that State, the assurance undertaking persists in violating the legal provisions in force in the Member State concerned, the latter may, after informing the competent authorities of the home Member State, take appropriate measures to prevent or penalise further irregularities, including, in so far as is strictly necessary, preventing that undertaking from continuing to conclude new assurance contracts within its territory. Member States shall ensure that in their territories it is possible to serve the legal documents necessary for such measures on assurance undertakings.
5.   Paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 shall not affect the emergency power of the Member States concerned to take appropriate measures to prevent or penalise irregularities committed within their territories. This shall include the possibility of preventing assurance undertakings from continuing to conclude new assurance contracts within their territories.
6.   Paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 shall not affect the power of the Member States to penalise infringements within their territories.
7.   If an assurance undertaking which has committed an infringement has an establishment or possesses property in the Member State concerned, the competent authorities of the latter may, in accordance with national law, apply the administrative penalties prescribed for that infringement by way of enforcement against that establishment or property.
8.   Any measure adopted under paragraphs 3 to 7 involving penalties or restrictions on the conduct of assurance business must be properly reasoned and communicated to the assurance undertaking concerned.
9.   Every two years, the Commission shall submit to the Insurance Committee a report summarising the number and type of cases in which, in each Member State, authorisation has been refused pursuant to Articles 40 or 42 or measures have been taken under paragraph 4 of this Article. Member States shall cooperate with the Commission by providing it with the information required for that report.
