Article 38
Financial recovery plan
1.   Member States shall ensure that the competent authorities have the power to require a financial recovery plan for those insurance undertakings where competent authorities consider that policy holders' rights are threatened. The financial recovery plan must as a minimum include particulars or proof concerning for the next three financial years:
(a)
estimates of management expenses, in particular current general expenses and commissions;
(b)
a plan setting out detailed estimates of income and expenditure in respect of direct business, reinsurance acceptances and reinsurance cessions;
(c)
a forecast balance sheet;
(d)
estimates of the financial resources intended to cover underwriting liabilities and the required solvency margin;
(e)
the overall reinsurance policy.
2.   Where policy holders' rights are threatened because the financial position of the undertaking is deteriorating, Member States shall ensure that the competent authorities have the power to oblige insurance undertakings to have a higher required solvency margin, in order to ensure that the insurance undertaking is able to fulfil the solvency requirements in the near future. The level of this higher required solvency margin shall be based on a financial recovery plan referred to in paragraph 1.
3.   Member States shall ensure that the competent authorities have the power to revalue downwards all elements eligible for the available solvency margin, in particular, where there has been a significant change in the market value of these elements since the end of the last financial year.
4.   Member States shall ensure that the competent authorities have the powers to decrease the reduction, based on reinsurance, to the solvency margin as determined in accordance with Article 28 where:
(a)
the nature or quality of reinsurance contracts has changed significantly since the last financial year;
(b)
there is no or an insignificant risk transfer under the reinsurance contracts.
5.   If the competent authorities have required a financial recovery plan for the insurance undertaking in accordance with paragraph 1, they shall refrain from issuing a certificate in accordance with Article 14(1), Article 40(3), second subparagraph, and Article 42(1)(a), as long as they consider that policy holders' rights are threatened within the meaning of paragraph 1.
