Article 53
Transfer of portfolio
1.   Under the conditions laid down by national law, each Member State shall authorise agencies and branches set up within its territory and covered by this Title to transfer all or part of their portfolios of contracts to an accepting office established in the same Member State if the competent authorities of that Member State or, if appropriate, those of the Member State referred to in Article 56 certify that after taking the transfer into account the accepting office possesses the necessary solvency margin.
2.   Under the conditions laid down by national law, each Member State shall authorise agencies and branches set up within its territory and covered by this Title to transfer all or part of their portfolios of contracts to an assurance undertaking with a head office in another Member State, if the competent authorities of that Member State certify that after taking the transfer into account the accepting office possesses the necessary solvency margin.
3.   If under the conditions laid down by national law, a Member State authorises agencies and branches set up within its territory and covered by this Title to transfer all or part of their portfolios of contracts to an agency or branch covered by this Title and set up within the territory of another Member State, it shall ensure that the competent authorities of the Member State of the accepting office or, if appropriate, of the Member State referred to in Article 56 certify that after taking the transfer into account the accepting office possesses the necessary solvency margin, that the law of the Member State of the accepting office permits such a transfer and that the State has agreed to the transfer.
4.   In the circumstances referred to in paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 the Member State in which the transferring agency or branch is situated shall authorise the transfer after obtaining the agreement of the competent authorities of the Member State of the commitment, where different from the Member State in which the transferring agency or branch is situated.
5.   The competent authorities of the Member States consulted shall give their opinion or consent to the competent authorities of the home Member State of the transferring assurance undertaking within three months of receiving a request; the absence of any response from the authorities consulted within that period shall be considered equivalent to a favourable opinion or tacit consent.
6.   A transfer authorised in accordance with this Article shall be published as laid down by national law in the Member State of the commitment. Such transfers shall automatically be valid against policy holders, assured persons and any other persons having rights or obligations arising out of the contracts transferred.
This provision shall not affect the Member States' right to give policy holders the option of cancelling contracts within a fixed period after a transfer.
