Article 52
Rules applicable to branches of third-country undertakings
1.
(a)
Subject to point (b), agencies and branches referred to in this Title may not simultaneously carry on in a Member State the activities referred to in the Annex to Directive 73/239/EEC and those covered by this Directive.
(b)
Subject to point (c), Member States may provide that agencies and branches referred to in this Title which on the relevant date referred to in Article 18(3) carried on both activities simultaneously in a Member State may continue to do so there provided that each activity is separately managed in accordance with Article 19.
(c)
Any Member State which under Article 18(6) requires undertakings established in its territory to cease the simultaneous pursuit of the activities in which they were engaged on the relevant date referred to in Article 18(3) must also impose this requirement on agencies and branches referred to in this Title which are established in its territory and simultaneously carry on both activities there.
(d)
Member States may provide that agencies and branches referred to in this Title whose head office simultaneously carries on both activities and which on the dates referred to in Article 18(3) carried on in the territory of a Member State solely the activity covered by this Directive may continue their activity there. If the undertaking wishes to carry on the activity referred to in Directive 73/239/EEC in that territory it may only carry on the activity covered by this Directive through a subsidiary.
2.   Articles 13 and 37 shall apply mutatis mutandis to agencies and branches referred to in this title.
For the purposes of applying Article 37, the competent authority which supervises the overall solvency of agencies or branches shall be treated in the same way as the competent authority of the head-office Member State.
3.   In the case of a withdrawal of authorisation by the authority referred to in Article 56(2), this authority shall notify the competent authorities of the other Member States where the undertaking operates and the latter authorities shall take the appropriate measures. If the reason for the withdrawal of authorisation is the inadequacy of the solvency margin calculated in accordance with Article 56(1)(a), the competent authorities of the other Member States concerned shall also withdraw their authorisations.
