Article 56
Advantages to undertakings authorised in more than one Member State
1.   Any undertaking which has requested or obtained authorisation from more than one Member State may apply for the following advantages which may be granted only jointly:
(a)
the solvency margin referred to in Article 55 shall be calculated in relation to the entire business which it carries on within the Community; in such case, account shall be taken only of the operations effected by all the agencies or branches established within the Community for the purposes of this calculation;
(b)
the deposit required under Article 51(2)(e) shall be lodged in only one of those Member States;
(c)
the assets representing the guarantee fund shall be localised in any one of the Member States in which it carries on its activities.
2.   Application to benefit from the advantages provided for in paragraph 1 shall be made to the competent authorities of the Member States concerned. The application must state the authority of the Member State which in future is to supervise the solvency of the entire business of the agencies or branches established within the Community. Reasons must be given for the choice of authority made by the undertaking. The deposit shall be lodged with that Member State.
3.   The advantages provided for in paragraph 1 may only be granted if the competent authorities of all Member States in which an application has been made agree to them. They shall take effect from the time when the selected competent authority informs the other competent authorities that it will supervise the state of solvency of the entire business of the agencies or branches within the Community.
The competent authority selected shall obtain from the other Member States the information necessary for the supervision of the overall solvency of the agencies and branches established in their territory.
4.   At the request of one or more of the Member States concerned, the advantages granted under this Article shall be withdrawn simultaneously by all Member States concerned.
