Article 3
Activities and bodies excluded
This Directive shall not concern:
1.
subject to the application of Article 2(1)(c), the classes designated in the Annex to Directive 73/239/EEC;
2.
operations of provident and mutual-benefit institutions whose benefits vary according to the resources available and which require each of their members to contribute at the appropriate flat rate;
3.
operations carried out by organisations other than undertakings referred to in Article 2, whose object is to provide benefits for employed or self-employed persons belonging to an undertaking or group of undertakings, or a trade or group of trades, in the event of death or survival or of discontinuance or curtailment of activity, whether or not the commitments arising from such operations are fully covered at all times by mathematical provisions;
4.
subject to the application of Article 2(3), insurance forming part of a statutory system of social security;
5.
organisations which undertake to provide benefits solely in the event of death, where the amount of such benefits does not exceed the average funeral costs for a single death or where the benefits are provided in kind;
6.
mutual associations, where:
—
the articles of association contain provisions for calling up additional contributions or reducing their benefits or claiming assistance from other persons who have undertaken to provide it, and
—
the annual contribution income for the activities covered by this Directive does not exceed EUR 5 million for three consecutive years. If this amount is exceeded for three consecutive years this Directive shall apply with effect from the fourth year.
Nevertheless, the provisions of this paragraph shall not prevent a mutual assurance undertaking from applying, or continuing, to be licensed under this Directive;
7.
the ‘Versorgungsverband deutscher Wirtschaftsorganisationen’ in Germany unless its statutes are amended as regards the scope of its activities;
8.
the pension activities of pension insurance undertakings prescribed in the Employees. Pension Act (TEL) and other related Finnish legislation provided that:
(a)
pension insurance companies which already under Finnish law are obliged to have separate accounting and management systems for their pension activities will furthermore, as from the date of accession, set up separate legal entities for carrying out these activities;
(b)
the Finnish authorities shall allow in a non-discriminatory manner all nationals and companies of Member States to perform according to Finnish legislation the activities specified in Article 2 related to this exemption whether by means of:
—
ownership or participation in an existing insurance company or group,
—
creation or participation of new insurance companies or groups, including pension insurance companies;
(c)
the Finnish authorities will submit to the Commission for approval a report within three months from the date of accession, stating which measures have been taken to separate TEL activities from normal insurance activities carried out by Finnish insurance companies in order to conform to all the requirements of this Directive.
