Article 37
Assurance undertakings in difficulty
1.   If an assurance undertaking does not comply with Article 20, the competent authority of its home Member State may prohibit the free disposal of its assets after having communicated its intention to the competent authorities of the Member States of commitment.
2.   For the purposes of restoring the financial situation of an assurance undertaking, the solvency margin of which has fallen below the minimum required under Article 28, the competent authority of the home Member State shall require that a plan for the restoration of a sound financial position be submitted for its approval.
In exceptional circumstances, if the competent authority is of the opinion that the financial situation of the assurance undertaking will further deteriorate, it may also restrict or prohibit the free disposal of the assurance undertaking's assets. It shall inform the authorities of other Member States within the territories of which the assurance undertaking carries on business of any measures it has taken and the latter shall, at the request of the former, take the same measures.
3.   If the solvency margin falls below the guarantee fund as defined in Article 29, the competent authority of the home Member State shall require the assurance undertaking to submit a short-term finance scheme for its approval.
It may also restrict or prohibit the free disposal of the assurance undertaking's assets. It shall inform the authorities of other Member States within the territories of which the assurance undertaking carries on business accordingly and the latter shall, at the request of the former, take the same measures.
4.   The competent authorities may further take all measures necessary to safeguard the interests of the assured persons in the cases provided for in paragraphs 1, 2 and 3.
5.   Each Member State shall take the measures necessary to be able in accordance with its national law to prohibit the free disposal of assets located within its territory at the request, in the cases provided for in paragraphs 1, 2 and 3, of the assurance undertaking's home Member State, which shall designate the assets to be covered by such measures.
