Article 127
European Innovation Partnership for agricultural productivity and sustainability
1.   The aim of the European Innovation Partnership for agricultural productivity and sustainability (EIP) shall be to stimulate innovation and improve the exchange of knowledge.
The EIP shall support the AKIS, by connecting policies and instruments to speed up innovation.
2.   The EIP shall contribute to achieving the specific objectives set out in Article 6(1) and (2).
It shall in particular:
(a)
create added value by better linking research and farming practice and encouraging the wider use of available innovation measures;
(b)
connect innovation actors and projects;
(c)
promote the faster and wider transposition of innovative solutions into practice, including farmer-to-farmer exchange; and
(d)
inform the scientific community about the research needs of farming practice.
3.   EIP operational groups supported under the cooperation type of intervention referred to in Article 77 shall form part of the EIP. Each EIP operational group shall draw up a plan for an innovative project to be developed or implemented. The innovative project shall be based on the interactive innovation model which has as key principles:
(a)
developing innovative solutions focusing on farmers’ or foresters’ needs while also tackling the interactions across the whole supply chain where useful;
(b)
bringing together partners with complementary knowledge such as farmers, advisors, researchers, enterprises or non-governmental organisations in a targeted combination as best suited to achieve the project objectives; and
(c)
co-deciding and co-creating all along the project.
EIP operational groups may act at transnational, including cross-border, level. The envisaged innovation may be based on new practices, but also on traditional practices in a new geographical or environmental context.
EIP operational groups shall disseminate a summary of their plans and of the results of their projects, in particular through the national and European CAP networks.
