Article 50
Operational programmes
1.   The objectives referred to in Article 46 and the interventions in the fruit and vegetables sector set out by the Member States in their CAP Strategic Plans shall be implemented through approved operational programmes of producer organisations or associations of producer organisations recognised under Regulation (EU) No 1308/2013, or both, under the conditions laid down in this Article.
2.   Operational programmes shall have a minimum duration of three years and a maximum duration of seven years.
3.   Operational programmes shall pursue at least the objectives referred to in Article 46, points (b), (e) and (f).
4.   For each objective selected, the operational programmes shall describe the interventions selected from among those set out by the Member States in their CAP Strategic Plans.
5.   Producer organisations or associations of producer organisations recognised under Regulation (EU) No 1308/2013 shall submit operational programmes to Member States for approval and, if approved, shall implement them.
6.   Operational programmes of associations of producer organisations shall not cover the same interventions as operational programmes of member organisations. Member States shall consider operational programmes of associations of producer organisations together with operational programmes of member organisations.
To that end Member States shall ensure that:
(a)
interventions under operational programmes of an association of producer organisations are entirely financed, without prejudice to Article 51(1), point (b), by contributions of the member organisations of that association and that such funding is collected from the operational funds of those member organisations;
(b)
interventions and their corresponding financial share are identified in the operational programme of each member organisation;
(c)
there is no duplication of funding.
7.   Member States shall ensure that, for each operational programme:
(a)
at least 15 % of expenditure covers the interventions linked to the objectives referred to in Article 46, points (e) and (f);
(b)
the operational programme includes three or more actions linked to the objectives referred to in Article 46, points (e) and (f);
(c)
at least 2 % of expenditure covers the interventions linked to the objective referred to in Article 46, point (d); and
(d)
the expenditure for interventions within the types of intervention referred to in Article 47(2), points (f), (g) and (h), does not exceed one third of the total expenditure.
Where at least 80 % of the members of a producer organisation are subject to one or more identical agri-environment-climate or organic farming commitments provided for in Chapter IV, each of those commitments shall count as an action for the minimum of three referred to in the first subparagraph, point (b).
8.   Operational programmes may set out the actions proposed to ensure that workers in the sector enjoy fair and safe working conditions.
