Article 15
Farm advisory services
1.   Member States shall include in their CAP Strategic Plans a system providing services for advising farmers and other beneficiaries of CAP support on land management and farm management (‘farm advisory services’). Member States may build upon existing systems.
2.   The farm advisory services shall cover economic, environmental and social dimensions, taking into account existing farming practices, and deliver up-to-date technological and scientific information developed by means of research and innovation projects, including as regards the provision of public goods.
Through the farm advisory services, appropriate assistance shall be offered along the cycle of the farm development, including for the setting-up for the first time, conversion of production patterns towards consumer demand, innovative practices, agricultural techniques for resilience to climate change, including agroforestry and agroecology, improved animal welfare, and where necessary safety standards and social support.
Farm advisory services shall be integrated within the interrelated services of farm advisors, researchers, farmer organisations and other relevant stakeholders that form the AKIS.
3.   Member States shall ensure that the advice given is impartial and that advisors are suitably qualified, appropriately trained and have no conflict of interest.
4.   The farm advisory services shall be adapted to the various types of production and farms and shall cover at least the following:
(a)
all requirements, conditions and management commitments applying to farmers and other beneficiaries set in the CAP Strategic Plan, including requirements and standards under conditionality and conditions for interventions, as well as information on financial instruments and business plans established under the CAP Strategic Plan;
(b)
the requirements laid down by Member States for implementing Directive 92/43/EEC, Directive 2000/60/EC, Article 55 of Regulation (EC) No 1107/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council (38), Directive 2008/50/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (39), Directive 2009/128/EC, Directive 2009/147/EC, Regulation (EU) 2016/429 of the European Parliament and of the Council (40), Regulation (EU) 2016/2031 of the European Parliament and of the Council (41) and Directive (EU) 2016/2284 of the European Parliament and of the Council (42);
(c)
farm practices preventing the development of antimicrobial resistance as set out in Commission communication of 29 June 2017 entitled ‘A European One Health Action Plan against Antimicrobial Resistance (AMR)’;
(d)
risk prevention and management;
(e)
innovation support, in particular for preparing and for implementing the projects of the EIP operational groups referred to in Article 127(3);
(f)
digital technologies in agriculture and rural areas as referred to in Article 114, point (b);
(g)
sustainable management of nutrients, including at the latest as from 2024 the use of a Farm Sustainability Tool for Nutrients, which is any digital application that provides at least:
(i)
a balance of the main nutrients at field scale;
(ii)
the legal requirements on nutrients;
(iii)
soil data, based on available information and analyses;
(iv)
data from the integrated administration and control system (IACS) relevant for nutrient management;
(h)
conditions of employment, employer obligations, occupational health and safety and social support in farming communities.
