Article 55
Types of intervention in the apiculture sector and Union financial assistance
1.   Member States shall choose in their CAP Strategic Plans for each chosen specific objective set out in Article 6(1) one or more of the following types of intervention in the apiculture sector:
(a)
advisory services, technical assistance, training, information and exchange of best practices, including through networking, for beekeepers and beekeepers’ organisations;
(b)
investments in tangible and intangible assets, as well as other actions, including for:
(i)
combatting beehive invaders and diseases, in particular varroasis;
(ii)
preventing damage caused by adverse climatic events and promoting the development and use of management practices adapted to changing climate conditions;
(iii)
restocking of beehives in the Union, including bee breeding;
(iv)
rationalising transhumance;
(c)
actions to support laboratories for the analysis of apiculture products, bee losses or productivity drops, and substances potentially toxic to bees;
(d)
actions to preserve or increase the existing number of beehives in the Union, including bee breeding;
(e)
cooperation with specialised bodies for the implementation of research programmes in the field of beekeeping and apiculture products;
(f)
promotion, communication and marketing including market monitoring actions and activities aimed in particular at raising consumer awareness about the quality of apiculture products;
(g)
actions to enhance product quality.
2.   Member States shall substantiate in their CAP Strategic Plans their choice of specific objectives and types of intervention. Within the chosen types of intervention, they shall specify interventions.
3.   Member States shall set out in their CAP Strategic Plans the funding provided by them for the types of intervention chosen in their CAP Strategic Plans.
4.   Member States shall provide at least the same amount of funding as the Union financial assistance they use on the basis of Article 88(2) for supporting the types of intervention referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article.
5.   The total financial assistance provided by the Union and Member States shall not exceed the expenditure incurred by the beneficiary.
6.   When drawing up their CAP Strategic Plans, Member States shall collaborate with the representatives of organisations in the beekeeping field.
7.   Member States shall notify the Commission annually of the number of beehives in their territory.
