Article 123
Managing authority
1.   Each Member State shall designate a national managing authority for its CAP Strategic Plan.
Member States may, taking into account their constitutional and institutional provisions, designate regional managing authorities to be responsible for some or all of the tasks referred to in paragraph 2.
Member States shall ensure that the relevant management and control system has been set up in such a way that it ensures a clear allocation and separation of functions between the national managing authority and, where relevant, regional managing authorities and other bodies. Member States shall be responsible for ensuring that the system functions effectively throughout the CAP Strategic Plan period.
2.   The managing authority shall be responsible for managing and implementing the CAP Strategic Plan in an efficient, effective and correct way. In particular, it shall ensure that:
(a)
there is an electronic information system as referred to in Article 130;
(b)
farmers, other beneficiaries and other bodies involved in the implementation of interventions:
(i)
are informed of their obligations resulting from the aid granted, and maintain either a separate accounting system or an adequate accounting code for all transactions relating to an operation, where relevant;
(ii)
are aware of the requirements concerning the provision of data to the managing authority and the recording of outputs and results;
(c)
the farmers and other beneficiaries concerned are provided, where appropriate by the use of electronic means, with clear and precise information on the statutory management requirements and the minimum GAEC standards established pursuant to Title III, Chapter I, Section 2, as well as on the requirements related to social conditionality established pursuant to Title III, Chapter I, Section 3, to be applied at farm level;
(d)
the ex-ante evaluation referred to in Article 139 conforms to the evaluation and monitoring system and is submitted to the Commission;
(e)
the evaluation plan referred to in Article 140(4) is in place and that the ex-post evaluations referred to in that Article are conducted within the time limits laid down in this Regulation, ensuring that such evaluations conform to the monitoring and evaluation system and that they are submitted to the monitoring committee and the Commission;
(f)
the monitoring committee is provided with the information and documents needed to monitor the implementation of the CAP Strategic Plan in the light of its specific objectives and priorities;
(g)
the annual performance report is drawn up, including aggregate monitoring tables, and, after the report has been submitted to the monitoring committee for opinion, is submitted to the Commission in accordance with Article 9(3), first subparagraph, point (b), of Regulation (EU) 2021/2116.
(h)
relevant follow-up actions on Commission’s observations on the annual performance reports are taken;
(i)
the paying agency receives all necessary information, in particular on the procedures operated and any controls carried out in relation to interventions selected for funding, before payments are authorised;
(j)
beneficiaries under interventions financed by the EAFRD, other than area- and animal-related interventions, acknowledge the financial support received, including the appropriate use of the Union emblem in accordance with the rules laid down by the Commission in accordance with paragraph 5;
(k)
publicity is made for the CAP Strategic Plan, including through the national CAP network, by informing:
(i)
potential beneficiaries, professional organisations, the economic and social partners, bodies involved in promoting equality between men and women, and the non-governmental organisations concerned, including environmental organisations, of the possibilities offered by the CAP Strategic Plan and the rules for gaining access to the CAP Strategic Plan funding; and
(ii)
farmers, other beneficiaries and the general public of the Union support for agriculture and rural development through the CAP Strategic Plan.
For support financed by the EAGF, as appropriate, Member States shall provide for the managing authority to use the visibility and communication tools and structures used by the EAFRD.
3.   Where regional managing authorities referred to in paragraph 1, second subparagraph, are responsible for the tasks referred to in paragraph 2, the national managing authority shall ensure appropriate coordination between those authorities with a view to guaranteeing the coherence and consistency of the CAP Strategic Plan design and implementation.
4.   The national managing authority or, where relevant, the regional managing authorities may delegate tasks to intermediate bodies. In that case, the delegating managing authority shall retain full responsibility for the efficiency and correctness of the management and implementation of those tasks and ensure that appropriate provisions are in place to allow the intermediate body to obtain all necessary data and information for the execution of those tasks.
5.   The Commission may adopt implementing acts laying down uniform conditions for the application of the information, publicity and visibility requirements referred to in paragraph 2, points (j) and (k). Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 153(2).
