Article 81
Use of the EAFRD delivered through InvestEU
1.   Member States may allocate, in the proposal for a CAP Strategic Plan referred to in Article 118 or in the request for amendment of a CAP Strategic Plan referred to in Article 119, an amount of up to 3 % of the initial total EAFRD allocation to the CAP Strategic Plan to be contributed to InvestEU and delivered through the EU guarantee and the InvestEU Advisory Hub. The CAP Strategic Plan shall contain a justification for the use of InvestEU and its contribution to the achievement of one or more of the specific objectives set out in Article 6(1) and (2) and chosen under the CAP Strategic Plan.
The amount contributed to InvestEU shall be implemented in accordance with the rules established in Regulation (EU) 2021/523.
2.   Member States shall determine the total amount contributed for each year. In the case of a request for an amendment of a CAP Strategic Plan, those amounts shall concern only future years.
3.   The amount referred to in paragraph 1 shall be used for the provisioning of the part of the EU guarantee under the Member State compartment and for the InvestEU Advisory Hub, upon conclusion of the contribution agreement referred to in Article 10(3) of Regulation (EU) 2021/523. The budgetary commitments of the Union in respect of each contribution agreement may be made by the Commission in annual instalments during the period between 1 January 2023 and 31 December 2027.
4.   Where a contribution agreement as referred to in Article 10(2) of Regulation (EU) 2021/523 for the amount referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article allocated in the CAP Strategic Plan has not been concluded within four months following the adoption of the Commission implementing decision approving that CAP Strategic Plan in accordance with Article 118 of this Regulation, the corresponding amount shall be reallocated in the CAP Strategic Plan following the approval of a request for amendment by the Member State submitted in accordance with Article 119 of this Regulation.
A contribution agreement for the amount referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article allocated in a request for amendment of a CAP Strategic Plan submitted in accordance with Article 119 of this Regulation shall be concluded simultaneously with the adoption of the Commission implementing decision approving that amendment of the CAP Strategic Plan.
5.   Where a guarantee agreement as referred to in Article 10(4), second subparagraph, of Regulation (EU) 2021/523 has not been concluded within nine months from the approval of the contribution agreement, the contribution agreement shall be terminated or prolonged by mutual agreement.
Where the participation of a Member State in InvestEU is discontinued, the amounts concerned paid into the common provisioning fund as provisioning shall be recovered as internal assigned revenue pursuant to Article 21(5) of the Financial Regulation and the Member State shall submit a request for amendment of its CAP Strategic Plan to use the amounts recovered and the amounts allocated to future calendar years in accordance with paragraph 2 of this Article.
The termination or amendment of the contribution agreement shall be concluded simultaneously with the adoption of the Commission implementing decision approving the relevant amendment of the CAP Strategic Plan and at the latest on 31 December 2026.
6.   Where a guarantee agreement as referred to in Article 10(4), third subparagraph, of Regulation (EU) 2021/523 has not been duly implemented within the period agreed in the contribution agreement, but not exceeding four years from the signature of the guarantee agreement, the contribution agreement shall be amended. The Member State may request that amounts contributed to the EU guarantee under paragraph 1 of this Article and committed in the guarantee agreement but not covering underlying loans, equity investments or other risk bearing instruments are treated in accordance with paragraph 5 of this Article.
7.   Resources generated by or attributable to the amounts contributed to the EU guarantee shall be made available to the Member State in accordance with Article 10(5), point (a), of Regulation (EU) 2021/523 and shall be used for support under the same objective or objectives referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article in the form of financial instruments or budgetary guarantees.
8.   The automatic decommitment time limit as provided for in Article 34 of Regulation (EU) 2021/2116 for the amounts to be reused in a CAP Strategic Plan in accordance with paragraphs 4, 5 and 6 of this Article shall start in the year in which the corresponding budgetary commitments are made.
