Article 102
Planned unit amounts and planned outputs
1.   Member States shall set out one or more planned unit amounts for each intervention included in their CAP Strategic Plans. The planned unit amount may be uniform or average, as determined by Member States. The ‘planned uniform unit amount’ is the value that is expected to be paid for each related output. The ‘planned average unit amount’ is the average value of the different unit amounts that are expected to be paid for the related outputs.
For interventions covered by the integrated system referred to in Article 65(2) of Regulation (EU) 2021/2116, uniform unit amounts shall be set out, except where uniform unit amounts are not possible or appropriate because of the design or scope of the intervention. In such cases, average unit amounts shall be set out.
2.   For types of intervention in the form of direct payments, Member States may set maximum or minimum planned unit amounts or both for each unit amount planned for each intervention.
The ‘maximum planned unit amount’ and the ‘minimum planned unit amount’ are the maximum and minimum unit amounts that are expected to be paid for the related outputs.
When setting the maximum or minimum planned unit amounts or both, Member States may justify those values with the necessary flexibility for reallocation to avoid unused funds.
The realised unit amount referred to in Article 134(5), first subparagraph, point (c), may only be lower than the planned unit amount or the minimum planned unit amount, where such amount is set out, to prevent an excess of the financial allocations for types of intervention in the form of direct payments referred to in Article 87(1).
3.   For types of intervention for rural development, when using planned average unit amounts, Member States may set a maximum planned average unit amount.
The ‘maximum planned average unit amount’ is the maximum amount that is expected to be paid on average for the related outputs.
4.   Where different unit amounts are established for an intervention, paragraphs 2 and 3 shall apply to each relevant unit amount of that intervention.
5.   Member States shall set out the annual planned outputs for each intervention quantified for each planned uniform or average unit amount. Within an intervention, the annual planned outputs may be provided at an aggregated level for all unit amounts or for a group of unit amounts.
