Article 79
Selection of operations
1.   After consultation of the monitoring committee referred to in Article 124 (‘the monitoring committee’), the national managing authority, regional managing authorities where relevant, or designated intermediate bodies shall set out selection criteria for interventions relating to the following types of intervention: investments, setting-up of young farmers and new farmers and rural business start-up, cooperation, knowledge exchange and dissemination of information. Those selection criteria shall aim to ensure equal treatment of applicants, better use of financial resources and targeting of the support in accordance with the purpose of the interventions.
Member States may decide not to apply selection criteria for investment interventions clearly targeting environmental purposes or carried out in connection with restoration activities.
By way of derogation from the first subparagraph, a different selection method may be established in duly justified cases after consultation of the monitoring committee.
2.   The responsibility of the managing authorities or designated intermediate bodies set out in paragraph 1 shall be without prejudice to the tasks of the local action groups referred to in Article 33 of Regulation (EU) 2021/1060.
3.   Paragraph 1 shall not apply where support is provided in the form of financial instruments.
4.   Member States may decide not to apply the selection criteria referred to in paragraph 1 to operations that have received a Seal of Excellence certification under Horizon 2020, established by Regulation (EU) No 1291/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council (47), under Horizon Europe or under the Programme for the Environment and Climate Action (LIFE), established by Regulation (EU) 2021/783 of the European Parliament and of the Council (48), provided that those operations are consistent with the CAP Strategic Plan.
5.   All or part of an operation may be implemented outside the Member State concerned, including outside the Union, provided that the operation contributes to the achievement of the objectives of the CAP Strategic Plan.
