Article 124
Monitoring committee
1.   Each Member State shall set up a national committee to monitor the implementation of the CAP Strategic Plan within three months of the date of notification to the Member State of the Commission implementing decision approving a CAP Strategic Plan.
Each monitoring committee shall adopt its rules of procedure, which shall include provisions on the coordination with regional monitoring committees when set up in accordance with paragraph 5, on the prevention of conflicts of interest and on the application of the principle of transparency.
The monitoring committee shall meet at least once a year and shall review all issues that affect the CAP Strategic Plan progress towards achieving its targets.
Each Member State shall publish the rules of procedure and the opinions of the monitoring committee.
2.   Each Member State shall decide the composition of the monitoring committee and shall ensure a balanced representation of the relevant public authorities and intermediate bodies and of representatives of the partners referred to in Article 106(3).
Each member of the monitoring committee shall have a vote.
The Member State shall publish the list of the members of the monitoring committee online.
Representatives of the Commission shall participate in the work of the monitoring committee in an advisory capacity.
3.   The monitoring committee shall examine in particular:
(a)
progress in CAP Strategic Plan implementation and in achieving the milestones and targets;
(b)
any issues that affect the performance of the CAP Strategic Plan and the actions taken to address those issues, including progress towards simplification and reduction of administrative burden for final beneficiaries;
(c)
the elements of the ex-ante assessment listed in Article 58(3) of Regulation (EU) 2021/1060 and the strategy document referred to in Article 59(1) of that Regulation;
(d)
progress made in carrying out evaluations, syntheses of evaluations and any follow-up given to findings;
(e)
relevant information related to the performance of the CAP Strategic Plan supplied by the national CAP network;
(f)
the implementation of communication and visibility actions;
(g)
administrative capacity building for public authorities and farmers and other beneficiaries, where relevant.
4.   The monitoring committee shall give its opinion on:
(a)
the methodology and criteria used for the selection of operations;
(b)
the annual performance reports;
(c)
the evaluation plan and amendments thereof;
(d)
any proposal by the managing authority for an amendment of the CAP Strategic Plan.
5.   Where elements are established at regional level, the Member State concerned may set up regional monitoring committees to monitor the implementation of the regional elements and provide the national monitoring committee with information in this respect. This Article shall apply to those regional monitoring committees mutatis mutandis as regards the elements established at regional level.
