Article 60
Specific rules on Union financial assistance to the wine sector
1.   The Member States referred to in Article 88(1) shall ensure that the Union financial assistance for harvest insurance does not distort competition in the insurance market.
2.   The Member States referred to in Article 88(1) shall establish a system based on objective criteria to ensure that green harvesting does not lead to compensation of individual producers in excess of the limit laid down in Article 59(3).
3.   The amount of the Union assistance for distillation of by-products of wine making referred to in Article 58(1), first subparagraph, point (g), shall be fixed per % volume and per hectolitre of alcohol produced. No Union financial assistance shall be paid for the volume of alcohol contained in the by-products to be distilled which exceeds 10 % in relation to the volume of alcohol contained in the wine produced.
The Member States referred to in Article 88(1) shall ensure that the Union financial assistance for distillation of by-products of wine making is paid to distillers that process by-products of winemaking delivered for distillation into raw alcohol with an alcoholic strength of at least 92 % by volume.
The Union financial assistance shall include a lump sum amount to compensate for the costs of collection of the by-products of winemaking. That amount shall be transferred from the distiller to the producer in cases where the relevant costs are borne by the latter.
The Member States referred to in Article 88(1) shall ensure that the alcohol resulting from the distillation of by-products of winemaking for which a Union financial assistance has been granted is used exclusively for industrial or energy purposes that do not distort competition.
4.   The Member States referred to in Article 88(1) shall ensure in their CAP Strategic Plans that at least 5 % of the expenditure is earmarked and at least one action is adopted to meet the objectives in favour of protection of the environment, adaptation to climate change, improving sustainability of production systems and processes, reduction of environmental impact of the Union wine sector, energy savings and improving global energy efficiency in the wine sector, in accordance with the objectives laid down in Article 57, points (b), (d) and (h).
