Article 67
Types of intervention in other sectors
1.   For each sector chosen in accordance with Article 66, Member States shall choose one or more of the types of intervention referred to in Article 47 to be implemented through approved operational programmes drawn up by:
(a)
producer organisations and their associations recognised under Regulation (EU) No 1308/2013 or under paragraph 7 of this Article; or
(b)
cooperatives, as well as other forms of cooperation between producers constituted at the initiative of producers and controlled by them, that have been identified by the competent authority of a Member State as producer groups, for a transitional period of up to four years from the start of an approved operational programme ending on 31 December 2027 at the latest.
2.   Member States shall set the criteria for being identified as producer groups and shall determine the activities and objectives of the producer groups referred to in paragraph 1, point (b), with the aim that those producer groups be able to meet the requirements for recognition as producer organisations under Articles 152 to 154 or 161 of Regulation (EU) No 1308/2013 or under paragraph 7 of this Article.
3.   Producer groups referred to in paragraph 1, point (b), shall, in addition to an operational programme, draw up and submit a recognition plan with a view to fulfilling, within the transitional period referred to in that point, the requirements laid down in Articles 152 to 154 or 161 of Regulation (EU) No 1308/2013 or under paragraph 7 of this Article for recognition as producer organisations.
The recognition plan shall set activities and targets to ensure the progress towards obtaining such recognition.
The support granted to a producer group that is not recognised as a producer organisation by the end of the transitional period shall be subject to recovery.
4.   Member States shall substantiate their choice of types of intervention referred to in paragraph 1.
Member States that decide to implement types of intervention provided for in this Section for products listed in Annex VI shall specify, for each sector they choose, the list of products covered by that sector.
5.   Types of intervention referred to in Article 47(2), points (c) and (f) to (i), shall not apply to cotton, rape and colza seeds, sunflower seeds and soya beans included in Annex VI.
6.   The operational programmes referred to in paragraph 1 shall fulfil the conditions laid down in Article 50(2), (4), (5), (6) and (8).
7.   Member States which choose to implement types of intervention referred to in Article 42, point (f), in the cotton sector shall recognise producer organisations in that sector and associations of such producer organisations in accordance with the requirements and using the procedures laid down in Article 152(1) and in Articles 153 to 156 of Regulation (EU) No 1308/2013. Producer groups of cotton and federations of such producer groups recognised by Member States in accordance with the Protocol No 4 to the 1979 Act of Accession of the Hellenic Republic before the entry into application of this Regulation are, for the purposes of this Section, considered to be producer organisations or associations of producer organisations, respectively.
8.   Member States shall ensure that the expenditure on the types of intervention referred to in Article 47(2), points (f), (g) and (h), does not exceed one third of the total expenditure under each operational programme as set out in their CAP Strategic Plans.
