Article 141
Performance assessment and evaluation
1.   The Commission shall establish a multiannual evaluation plan of the CAP to be carried out under its responsibility. That evaluation plan shall also cover the measures under Regulation (EU) No 1308/2013.
2.   The Commission shall submit to the European Parliament and to the Council a summary report of Member States’ CAP Strategic Plans by 31 December 2023. The report shall include an analysis of the joint effort and collective ambition of Member States to address the specific objectives set out in Article 6(1) and (2), in particular those mentioned in Article 6(1), points (d), (e), (f) and (i).
3.   By 31 December 2025, the Commission shall submit a report to the European Parliament and the Council in order to assess the operation of the new delivery model by the Member States and consistency and combined contribution of the interventions in Member States’ CAP Strategic Plans to achieving environmental and climate-related commitments of the Union. When necessary, the Commission shall issue recommendations to the Member States to facilitate the achievement of those commitments.
4.   The Commission shall carry out an interim evaluation to examine the effectiveness, efficiency, relevance, coherence and Union added value of the EAGF and the EAFRD by 31 December 2026, taking into account the indicators set out in Annex I. The Commission may make use of all relevant information already available in accordance with Article 128 of the Financial Regulation.
5.   The Commission shall carry out an ex-post evaluation to examine the effectiveness, efficiency, relevance, coherence and Union added value of the EAGF and the EAFRD.
6.   Based on evidence provided in evaluations on the CAP, including evaluations on CAP Strategic Plans, as well as other relevant information sources, the Commission shall present a report on the interim evaluation, including first results on the performance of the CAP, to the European Parliament and the Council by 31 December 2027. A second report including an assessment of the performance of the CAP shall be presented by 31 December 2031.
