Article 30
Complementary income support for young farmers
1.   Member States may provide for complementary income support for young farmers determined in accordance with the criteria laid down in Article 4(6) under the conditions set out in this Article and as further specified in their CAP Strategic Plans.
2.   As part of their obligations to attract young farmers in line with the objective set out in Article 6(1), point (g), and to dedicate to this objective, in accordance with Article 95, at least an amount as set out in Annex XII, Member States may provide a complementary income support for young farmers who have newly set up for the first time and who are entitled to a payment under the basic income support referred to in Article 21.
Member States may decide to grant the support under this Article to farmers who have received support under Article 50 of Regulation (EU) No 1307/2013 for the remainder of the period referred to in paragraph 5 of that Article.
3.   The complementary income support for young farmers shall be granted for a maximum duration of five years, starting from the first year of submission of the application for the payment for young farmers, and subject to the conditions to be determined by the CAP legal framework applicable for the period after 2027 when the duration of five years goes beyond 2027. Member States shall ensure that no legal expectations of beneficiaries are created for the period after 2027.
That support shall take the form either of an annual decoupled payment per eligible hectare or of a lump-sum payment per young farmer.
Member States may decide to grant the support under this Article only to a maximum number of hectares per young farmer.
4.   In the case of a legal person, or a group of natural or legal persons such as group of farmers, producer organisations or cooperatives, Member States may apply the maximum number of hectares referred to in paragraph 3 at the level of the members of those legal persons or groups:
(a)
who comply with the definition and conditions for a ‘young farmer’ determined in accordance with Article 4(6); and
(b)
where national law provides for the individual members to assume rights and obligations comparable to those of individual farmers who have the status of a head of holding, in particular as regards their economic, social and tax status, provided that they have contributed to strengthening the agricultural structures of the legal persons or groups concerned.

Subsection 4



Schemes for the climate, the environment and animal welfare


