Article 80
Specific rules for financial instruments
1.   Support in the form of financial instruments referred to in Article 58 of Regulation (EU) 2021/1060 may be granted under the types of intervention referred to in Articles 73 to 78 of this Regulation.
2.   Where support is granted in the form of financial instruments, the definitions of ‘financial instrument’, ‘financial product’, ‘final recipient’, ‘holding fund’, ‘specific fund’, ‘leverage effect’, ‘multiplier ratio’, ‘management costs’ and ‘management fees’ laid down in Article 2 of Regulation (EU) 2021/1060 and the provisions of Title V, Chapter II, Section II, of that Regulation shall apply.
In addition, paragraphs 3, 4 and 5 of this Article shall apply.
3.   In accordance with Article 58(2) of Regulation (EU) 2021/1060, working capital, including standalone working capital, may be eligible expenditure under Articles 73, 74, 76, 77 and 78 of this Regulation if it contributes to the achievement of at least one specific objective relevant for the intervention concerned. Support for standalone working capital finance under any of those Articles may be provided without being subject to the requirement that the final recipient receives support for other expenditure under the same Article.
For activities falling within the scope of Article 42 TFEU, the total amount of support for working capital provided to a final recipient shall not exceed a gross grant equivalent of EUR 200 000 over any period of three fiscal years.
4.   By way of derogation from Articles 73, 74, 76, 77 and 78, the support rates laid down in those Articles shall not apply to standalone working capital finance.
5.   Eligible expenditure of a financial instrument shall be the total amount of eligible public expenditure paid, excluding additional national financing as referred to in Article 115(5), or, in the case of guarantees, set aside for guarantee contracts by the financial instrument within the eligibility period. That amount shall correspond to:
(a)
payments to final recipients, in the case of loans, equity and quasi-equity investments;
(b)
resources set aside for guarantee contracts, whether outstanding or having already come to maturity, in order to honour possible guarantee calls for losses, calculated on the basis of a multiplier ratio established for the respective underlying disbursed new loans or equity investments in final recipients;
(c)
payments to, or for the benefit of, final recipients where financial instruments are combined with other Union contributions in a single financial instrument operation in accordance with Article 58(5) of Regulation (EU) 2021/1060;
(d)
payments of management fees and reimbursements of management costs incurred by the bodies implementing the financial instrument.
Where a financial instrument is implemented across consecutive programming periods, support may be provided to, or for the benefit of, final recipients, including management costs and fees, based on agreements made under the previous programming period, provided that such support complies with the eligibility rules of the subsequent programming period. In such cases, the eligibility of expenditure submitted in the declarations of expenditure shall be determined in accordance with the rules of the programming period concerned.
For the purposes of the first subparagraph, point (b), if the entity benefitting from the guarantees has not disbursed the planned amount of new loans, equity or quasi-equity investments to final recipients in accordance with the multiplier ratio, the eligible expenditure shall be reduced proportionally. The multiplier ratio may be reviewed where justified by subsequent changes in market conditions. Such a review shall not have retroactive effect.
For the purposes of the first subparagraph, point (d), of this paragraph, management fees shall be performance-based. Where bodies implementing a holding fund are selected through a direct award of contract pursuant to Article 59(3) of Regulation (EU) 2021/1060, the amount of management cost and fees paid to those bodies that can be declared as eligible expenditure shall be subject to a threshold of up to 5 % of the total amount of eligible public expenditure disbursed to final recipients in loans or set aside for guarantee contracts and up to 7 % of the total amount of eligible public expenditure disbursed to final recipients in equity and quasi-equity investments.
Where bodies implementing a specific fund are selected through a direct award of contract pursuant to Article 59(3) of Regulation (EU) 2021/1060, the amount of management cost and fees paid to those bodies that can be declared as eligible expenditure shall be subject to a threshold of up to 7 % of the total amount of the eligible public expenditure disbursed to final recipients in loans or set aside for guarantee contracts and up to 15 % of the total amount of eligible public expenditure disbursed to final recipients in equity or quasi-equity investments.
For the purposes of the first subparagraph, point (d), where bodies implementing a holding fund or specific funds are selected through a competitive tender in accordance with the applicable law, the amount of management costs and fees shall be established in the funding agreement and shall reflect the result of the competitive tender.
Where arrangement fees, or any part thereof, are charged to final recipients, they shall not be declared as eligible expenditure.
