Article 126
National and European CAP networks
1.   Each Member State shall establish a national network for the common agricultural policy (‘national CAP network’) for the networking of organisations and administrations, advisors, researchers and other innovation actors, and other actors in the field of agriculture and rural development at national level at the latest 12 months after the approval by the Commission of the CAP Strategic Plan. The national CAP networks shall build on the existing networking experience and practices in the Member States.
2.   The Commission shall establish a European network for the common agricultural policy (‘European CAP network’) for the networking of national networks, organisations, and administrations in the field of agriculture and rural development at Union level.
3.   Networking through the national and European CAP networks shall have the following objectives:
(a)
increase the involvement of all relevant stakeholders in the implementation of CAP Strategic Plans and, where relevant, in their design;
(b)
accompany the Member States’ administrations in the implementation of CAP Strategic Plans and the transition to a performance-based delivery model;
(c)
contribute to improving the quality of implementation of CAP Strategic Plans;
(d)
contribute to the information of the public and potential beneficiaries on the CAP and funding opportunities;
(e)
foster innovation in agriculture and rural development and support peer-to-peer learning and the inclusion of, and the interaction between, all stakeholders in the knowledge-exchange and knowledge-building process;
(f)
contribute to monitoring and evaluation capacity and activities;
(g)
contribute to the dissemination of CAP Strategic Plans results.
The objective set out in the first subparagraph, point (d), shall be addressed in particular through the national CAP networks.
4.   The tasks of the national and European CAP networks for the achievement of the objectives set out in paragraph 3 shall be the following:
(a)
collection, analysis and dissemination of information on actions and good practices implemented or supported under CAP Strategic Plans as well as analysis on developments in agriculture and rural areas relevant to the specific objectives set out in Article 6(1) and (2);
(b)
contribution to capacity building for Member States administrations and of other actors involved in the implementation of CAP Strategic Plans, including as regards monitoring and evaluation processes;
(c)
creation of platforms, fora and events to facilitate exchanges of experience between stakeholders and peer-to-peer learning, including where relevant exchanges with networks in third countries;
(d)
collection of information and facilitation of its dissemination as well as networking of funded structures and projects, such as local action groups referred to in Article 33 of Regulation (EU) 2021/1060, EIP operational groups referred to in Article 127(3) of this Regulation and equivalent structures and projects;
(e)
support for cooperation projects between EIP operational groups referred to in Article 127(3) of this Regulation, local action groups referred to in Article 33 of Regulation (EU) 2021/1060 or similar local development structures, including transnational cooperation;
(f)
creation of links to other Union-funded strategies or networks;
(g)
contribution to the further development of the CAP and preparation of any subsequent CAP Strategic Plan period;
(h)
in the case of national CAP networks, participating in, and contributing to, the activities of the European CAP network;
(i)
in the case of the European CAP network, cooperating with, and contributing to, the activities of the national CAP networks.
5.   The Commission shall adopt implementing acts setting out the organisational structure and operation of the European CAP network. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 153(2).
