Article 77
Cooperation
1.   Member States may grant support for cooperation under the conditions set out in this Article and as further specified in their CAP Strategic Plans to:
(a)
prepare and implement the projects of the EIP operational groups referred to in Article 127(3);
(b)
prepare and implement LEADER;
(c)
promote and support quality schemes recognised by the Union or by the Member States and their use by farmers;
(d)
support producer groups, producer organisations or interbranch organisations;
(e)
prepare and implement smart-village strategies, as determined by Member States;
(f)
support other forms of cooperation.
2.   Member States may only grant support under this Article to promote new forms of cooperation, including existing ones if starting a new activity. That cooperation shall involve at least two actors and shall contribute to achieving one or more of the specific objectives set out in Article 6(1) and (2).
3.   Member States may cover under this Article the costs related to all aspects of the cooperation.
4.   Member States may grant the support as an overall amount under this Article covering the costs of cooperation and the costs of the operations implemented, or they may cover only the costs of cooperation and use funds from other types of intervention for rural development, or from other national or Union support instruments, to cover the costs of the operations implemented.
Where support is paid as an overall amount, Member States shall ensure that the operation implemented complies with the relevant rules and requirements laid down in Articles 70 to 76 and 78.
In the case of LEADER, by way of derogation from the first subparagraph of this paragraph:
(a)
support for all costs eligible for preparatory support under Article 34(1), point (a), of Regulation (EU) 2021/1060 and for implementing selected strategies under points (b) and (c) of that paragraph shall only be granted as an overall amount under this Article; and
(b)
Member States shall ensure that implemented operations which consist of investments comply with the relevant Union rules and requirements under the type of intervention for investments laid down in Article 73 of this Regulation.
5.   Member States shall not support under this Article cooperation solely involving research bodies.
6.   In the case of cooperation in the context of farm succession, in particular for generational renewal at farm level, Member States may grant support only to farmers who have, or will have by the end of the operation, reached the retirement age determined by the Member State concerned in accordance with its national legislation.
7.   Member States shall limit support to a maximum of seven years. That condition shall not apply to LEADER and in duly justified cases to collective environment and climate actions necessary to achieve the specific objectives set out in Article 6(1), points (d), (e) and (f).
8.   Member States shall limit the support for:
(a)
information and promotion actions for quality schemes to one or more rates not exceeding 70 % of the eligible costs;
(b)
setting-up of producer groups, producer organisations or interbranch organisations to 10 % of the annual marketed production of the group or organisation with a maximum of EUR 100 000 per year; that support shall be degressive and limited to the first five years following recognition.
