Article 95
Minimum financial allocations for support for young farmers
1.   For each Member State the minimum amount set out in Annex XII shall be reserved for contributing to the achievement of the specific objective set out in Article 6(1), point (g). On the basis of the analysis of the situation in terms of strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats (‘the SWOT analysis’) and the identification of the needs that are to be addressed, the amount shall be used for either or both of the following types of intervention:
(a)
the complementary income support for young farmers laid down in Article 30;
(b)
the setting-up of young farmers referred to in Article 75(2), point (a).
2.   In addition to the types of intervention referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article, Member States may use the minimum amount referred to in that paragraph for investment interventions for young farmers referred to in Article 73, provided that a higher support rate in accordance with Article 73(4), second subparagraph, point (a)(ii), is applied. When that possibility is used, a maximum of 50 % of the expenditure for investments referred to in the first sentence shall be counted against the minimum amount to be reserved.
3.   For each calendar year, the total expenditure for types of intervention in the form of direct payments other than the complementary income support for young farmers laid down in Article 30 shall not exceed the financial allocation for direct payments for the relevant calendar year as laid down in Annex V, reduced by the part of Annex XII reserved under the complementary income support for young farmers for the relevant calendar year, as established by Member States in their financial plans in accordance with Article 112(2), point (a), and approved by the Commission in accordance with Article 118 or Article 119. That financial ceiling shall constitute a financial ceiling set by Union law.
4.   For the entire period of the CAP plan, the total EAFRD expenditure for rural development other than for the setting-up of young farmers referred to in Article 75(2), point (a), shall not exceed the total EAFRD contribution to the CAP Strategic Plan as set out in Annex XI, reduced by the part of Annex XII reserved for the setting-up of young farmers referred to in Article 75(2), point (a), for the entire CAP Strategic Plan period, as established by Member States in their financial plans in accordance with Article 112(2), point (a), and approved by the Commission in accordance with Article 118 or Article 119. That financial ceiling shall constitute a financial ceiling set by Union law.
5.   Where a Member State decides to use the possibility provided for in paragraph 2 of this Article, the share of expenditure for investment interventions for young farmers with a higher support rate in accordance with Article 73(4), second subparagraph, point (a)(ii), not exceeding 50 % as established by that Member State in its financial plan in accordance with Article 112(2), point (a), and approved by the Commission in accordance with Article 118 or Article 119, shall be counted for the establishment of the financial ceiling referred to in paragraph 4 of this Article.
