Article 88
Financial allocations for certain types of intervention in certain sectors
1.   The Union financial assistance for types of intervention in the wine sector is allocated to Member States as set out in Annex VII.
2.   The Union financial assistance for types of intervention in the apiculture sector is allocated to Member States as set out in Annex X.
3.   The Union financial assistance for types of intervention in the hops sector allocated to Germany shall be EUR 2 188 000 per financial year.
4.   The Union financial assistance for types of intervention in the olive oil and table olives sector, per financial year, is allocated as follows:
(a)
EUR 10 666 000 for Greece;
(b)
EUR 554 000 for France; and
(c)
EUR 34 590 000 for Italy.
5.   The Member States concerned may decide in their CAP Strategic Plans to transfer the total financial allocations referred to in paragraphs 3 and 4 to their allocations for direct payments. That decision may not be reviewed.
The Member States’ financial allocations transferred to allocations for direct payments shall no longer be available for the types of intervention referred to in paragraphs 3 and 4.
6.   Member States may decide in their CAP Strategic Plans to use up to 3 % of their allocations for direct payments set out in Annex V, where relevant after deduction of the allocations for cotton set in Annex VIII, for types of intervention in other sectors referred to in Title III, Chapter III, Section 7.
Member States may decide to increase the percentage referred to in the first subparagraph up to 5 %. In that case, the amount corresponding to that increase shall be deducted from the maximum set in Article 96(1), (2) or (5) and shall no longer be available for allocation to coupled income support interventions referred to in Title III, Chapter II, Section 3, Subsection 1.
The amount corresponding to the percentage of Member States’ allocations for direct payments referred to in the first and second subparagraphs of this paragraph and used for types of intervention in other sectors for a certain financial year shall be considered to be Member States’ allocations per financial year for types of intervention in other sectors.
7.   Member States may, in 2025, review their decisions referred to in paragraph 6 as part of a request for amendment of their CAP Strategic Plans made in accordance with Article 119.
8.   The amounts set out in the approved CAP Strategic Plan resulting from the application of paragraphs 6 and 7 shall be binding in the Member State concerned.
