Article 28
Electronic interface
1.   The Commission shall develop an electronic interface based on the European Union Single Window Environment for Customs, established by Regulation (EU) 2022/2399 of the European Parliament and of the Council (25), to enable the transmission of data, in particular the notifications and requests referred to in Article 26(6) to (9) of this Regulation, between national customs systems and the information system referred to in Article 33 of this Regulation. This electronic interface shall be in place by 30 June 2028.
2.   The Commission shall develop an electronic interface in accordance with Article 12 of Regulation (EU) 2022/2399 to enable:
(a)
operators and traders to comply with the obligation to submit the due diligence statement of a relevant commodity or relevant product pursuant to Article 4 of this Regulation, by making it available through the national single window environment for customs referred to in Article 8 of Regulation (EU) 2022/2399 and receive feedback thereon from competent authorities; and
(b)
the transmission of that due diligence statement to the information system referred to in Article 33.
3.   The Commission shall adopt implementing acts specifying the details of implementation arrangements for paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article and, in particular, defining the data, including their format, to be transmitted in accordance with paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article. The implementing acts shall also clarify how any changes in the status assigned by competent authorities to due diligence statements in the information system referred to in Article 33 shall be notified immediately and automatically to the relevant customs authorities through the electronic interface referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article. The implementing acts may also determine that certain specific data available in the due diligence statement and necessary for activities of customs authorities, including surveillance and fight against fraud, are transmitted and registered in Union and national customs systems. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 36(2).
