Article 9
Applications for a financial contribution from the Fund and the implementing acts referred to in Article 4(4), as well as the delegation agreement, reports and any other related documents shall express all amounts in euros.
Amounts of expenditure incurred in national currencies shall be converted into euros at the exchange rates published in the C series of the Official Journal of the European Union for the day on which the related implementing act has been adopted by the Commission. Where no exchange rate is published in the Official Journal of the European Union for the day on which the related implementing act has been adopted by the Commission, conversion shall be made at the average of the monthly accounting rates established by the Commission, determined over that period. This single exchange rate shall be used throughout the implementation of the financial contribution from the Fund and as the basis for the final implementation report and the statement on the implementation and the elements required under Article 59(5) or Article 60(5) of Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012 of the financial contribution.’;
(9)
in Article 10, paragraph 2 is replaced by the following:
‘2.   In the event of a significantly lower valuation of the damage incurred, as shown by new elements, the beneficiary State shall reimburse the corresponding amount of the financial contribution from the Fund to the Commission.’;
(10)
Article 11 is replaced by the following:
‘Article 11
1.   The Commission shall take appropriate measures ensuring that, when actions financed under this Regulation are implemented, the financial interests of the Union are protected by the application of preventive measures against fraud, corruption and any other illegal activities, by effective checks and, if irregularities are detected, by the recovery of the amounts wrongly paid and, where appropriate, by effective, proportionate and dissuasive administrative and financial penalties.
2.   The Commission or its representatives and the Court of Auditors shall have the power of audit, on the basis of documents and on the spot, over all funding beneficiaries, contractors, subcontractors who have received Union funds under this Regulation.
3.   The European Anti-Fraud Office (OLAF) may carry out investigations, including on-the-spot checks and inspections, in accordance with the provisions and procedures laid down in Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 883/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council (*5) and Council Regulation (Euratom, EC) No 2185/96 (*6) with a view to establishing whether there has been fraud, corruption or any other illegal activity affecting the financial interests of the Union in connection with a contract concerning Union funding.
4.   Without prejudice to paragraphs 1, 2 and 3, delegation agreements with third countries, contracts and decisions awarding a financial contribution from the Fund resulting from the implementation of this Regulation shall contain provisions expressly empowering the Commission, the Court of Auditors and OLAF to conduct such audits and investigations, in accordance with their respective competences.

(*5)  Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 883/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 September 2013 concerning investigations conducted by the European Anti-Fraud Office (OLAF) and repealing Regulation (EC) No 1073/1999 of the European Parliament and of the Council and Council Regulation (Euratom) No 1074/1999 (OJ L 248, 18.9.2013, p. 1)."
                        

(*6)  Council Regulation (Euratom, EC) No 2185/96 of 11 November 1996 concerning on-the-spot checks and inspections carried out by the Commission in order to protect the European Communities’s financial interests against fraud and other irregularities (OJ L 292, 15.11.1996, p. 2).’;"
                        
(11)
Articles 13 and 14 are deleted.
