Article 17
Determination of reference values and quota allocations for the placing on the market of hydrofluorocarbons
1.   By 31 October 2024 and at least every 3 years thereafter, the Commission shall determine reference values for producers and importers in accordance with Annex VII for the placing on the market of hydrofluorocarbons.
The Commission shall determine those reference values for all producers and importers that placed on the market hydrofluorocarbons during the previous 3 years, by means of an implementing act that determines references values for all producers and importers. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 34(2).
2.   An producer or importer may notify the Commission of a permanent succession or acquisition of the part of its business relevant to this Article that results in a change of the attribution of its reference values and those of its legal successor.
The Commission may request relevant documentation to that effect. The adjusted reference values shall be made accessible in the F-gas Portal.
3.   By 1 June 2024 and by 1 April 2027 and at least every 3 years thereafter, producers and importers may make a declaration for receiving quota from the reserve referred in Annex VIII via the F-gas Portal.
4.   By 31 December 2024 and every year thereafter, the Commission shall allocate quota for each producer and importer for placing on the market of hydrofluorocarbons, pursuant to Annex VIII. Quota shall be notified via the F-gas Portal to producers and importers.
5.   The quota allocations shall be subject to the payment of the amount due which equals EUR 3 for each tonne of CO2 equivalent of quota to be allocated. Producers and importers shall be notified via the F-gas Portal of the total amount due for their calculated maximum quota allocation for the following calendar year and of the deadline for completing the payment. The Commission may, by means of implementing acts, determine the detailed arrangements for the payment of the amount due. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 34(2).
Producers and importers may pay only for a part of the calculated maximum quota allocation offered to them. In such a case, those producers and importers shall be allocated the quota corresponding to the payment made by the deadline referred to in the first subparagraph.
Until 31 December 2027, the Commission shall redistribute the quota for which a payment has not been made by the set deadline, free of charge, to only those producers and importers that have paid the total amount due for their calculated maximum quota allocation referred to in the first subparagraph and that have made a declaration as referred to in paragraph 3. That redistribution shall be made on the basis of each producer’s or importer's share of the sum of all the maximum calculated quota offered to and paid for in full by those producers and importers. From 1 January 2028, the quota for which a payment has not been made by the set deadline shall be cancelled.
The Commission shall be authorised not to fully allocate the maximum quantity referred to in Annex VII or allocate additional quota, as contingency for implementation issues during the allocation period.
6.   The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 32 to amend paragraph 5 of this Article as regards the amounts due for the quota allocation and the mechanism to allocate remaining quota, in order to compensate for inflation.
7.   Every year, or more often following a substantiated request by a competent authority of a Member State, the Commission shall, after consultation of relevant stakeholders, assess the impact of the quota phase-down system laid down in Annex VII on the Union’s heat pump market considering relevant factors in particular, the development of prices of fluorinated greenhouse gases listed in Section 1 of Annex I the growth rate of heat pumps still requiring such gases, the market uptake of alternative technology and the state of the heat pump deployment rate target provided under the REPowerEU Plan. The Commission shall include the conclusions from those assessments in the relevant Annual Activity Report on Climate Action.
Where the assessment demonstrates a severe shortage of fluorinated greenhouse gases listed in Section 1 of Annex I for the deployment of heat pumps which could endanger the attainment of the REPowerEU heat pump deployment targets, the Commission shall adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 32 to amend Annex VII in order to allow the placing on the market of a quantity of fluorinated greenhouse gases listed in Annex I, in addition to the quota under Annex VII, respectively up to 4 410 247 tonnes of CO2 equivalent, per year, for the period 2025-2026 and up to 1 425 536 tonnes of CO2 equivalent, per year, for the period 2027-2029.
Where the Commission adopts a delegated act as referred to in the second subparagraph of this Article, the additional quota shall be distributed to producers and importers that have reported under Article 26, in the previous year, on heat pump use as one of the main categories of application in which the substance is used, following their request submitted via the F-gas Portal.
8.   The revenue generated from the quota allocation amount shall constitute external assigned revenue in accordance with Article 21(5) of Regulation (EU, Euratom) 2018/1046 of the European Parliament and of the Council (26). That revenue shall be assigned to the LIFE programme and to Heading 7 of the multiannual financial framework (European Public Administration), to cover the costs of external staff working on the management of the quota allocation, IT services, and licensing systems for the purpose of implementation of this Regulation and for ensuring compliance with the Protocol. The revenue used to cover those costs shall not exceed the maximum annual amount of EUR 3 million. Any revenue remaining after covering these costs shall be entered into the general budget of the Union.
