Article 22
Imports and exports
1.   The import and export of fluorinated greenhouse gases, and products and equipment containing those gases or whose functioning relies upon those gases shall be subject to the presentation of a valid licence to customs authorities issued by the Commission pursuant to Article 20(4) and (5), except in the case of temporary storage.
This paragraph does not apply to products and equipment that are personal effects.
2.   Fluorinated greenhouse gases imported into the Union shall be considered as virgin gases.
3.   From 12 March 2025 the export of foams, technical aerosols, stationary refrigeration and stationary air-conditioning equipment and stationary heat pumps as referred to in Annex IV that contain, or whose functioning relies upon, fluorinated greenhouse gases with a GWP of 1 000 or more shall be prohibited.
The prohibition set out in the first subparagraph shall not apply to military equipment or to products and equipment that can be placed on the market in the Union in accordance with Annex IV.
4.   By way of derogation from paragraph 3, the Commission may, by means of implementing acts, for cases of an exceptional nature, following a substantiated request by the competent authority of the Member State concerned, and taking into account the objectives of this Regulation, authorise the export of the products and equipment referred to paragraph 3, where it is demonstrated that in view of the economic value and the expected remaining lifetime of the specific good, the prohibition of export would impose a disproportionate burden on the exporter. Such exports shall only be allowed if they are in accordance with the national law of the country of destination.
Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 34(2).
5.   Undertakings with an establishment within the Union shall take all necessary measures to ensure that the export of refrigeration and air-conditioning equipment and of heat pumps, does not violate import restrictions that the importing state has notified under the Protocol.
