Article 8
Recovery and destruction
1.   Operators of equipment that contain fluorinated greenhouse gases, not contained in foams, shall ensure that those substances are recovered and, after the decommissioning of the equipment, they are recycled, reclaimed or destroyed.
The recovery of those substances shall be carried out by natural persons who hold the relevant certificates provided for in Article 10.
2.   The obligation laid down in paragraph 1 shall apply to operators of any of the following stationary equipment:
(a)
the cooling circuits of refrigeration, air-conditioning equipment and heat pumps;
(b)
equipment that contains fluorinated greenhouse gas-based solvents;
(c)
fire protection equipment;
(d)
electrical switchgear.
3.   The obligation laid down in paragraph 1 shall apply to operators of any of the following mobile equipment:
(a)
the cooling circuits of refrigeration units of refrigerated trucks and refrigerated trailers;
(b)
the cooling circuits of refrigeration units of refrigerated light-duty vehicles and intermodal containers, including reefers, and train wagons;
(c)
the cooling circuits of air-conditioning equipment and heat pumps in heavy duty vehicles, vans, non-road mobile machinery used in agriculture, mining and construction operations, trains, metros, trams and aircraft.
4.   For the recovery of fluorinated greenhouse gases from air-conditioning equipment in motor vehicles which fall within the scope of Directive 2006/40/EC and from mobile equipment referred to in paragraph (3), points (b) and (c), only natural persons holding at least a training attestation in accordance with Article 10(1), second subparagraph, of this Regulation, shall be considered to be appropriately qualified.
5.   The obligation laid down in paragraph 1 shall apply to operators of the mobile equipment under paragraph 3, points (b) and (c), from 12 March 2027.
6.   Any recovered fluorinated greenhouse gases listed in Annex I and in Section 1 of Annex II shall not be used for filling or refilling equipment unless the gas has been recycled or reclaimed.
7.   An undertaking that uses a container with fluorinated greenhouse gases listed in Annex I and in Section 1 of Annex II shall, immediately prior to its disposal, arrange for the recovery of any residual gases to make sure they are recycled, reclaimed or destroyed.
8.   From 1 January 2025, building owners and contractors shall ensure that, during renovation, refurbishing or demolition activities implying the removal of foam panels that contain foams with fluorinated greenhouse gases listed in Annex I and in Section 1 of Annex II, emissions are avoided to the extent possible by handling the foams or the gases contained therein in a way that ensures the destruction of those gases. In the case of recovery of those gases, the recovery shall be carried out only by appropriately qualified natural persons.
9.   From 1 January 2025, building owners and contractors shall ensure that, during renovation, refurbishing or demolition activities implying the removal of foams in laminated boards installed in cavities or built-up structures that contain fluorinated greenhouse gases listed in Annex I and in Section 1 of Annex II, emissions are avoided to the extent possible by handling the foams or the gases contained therein in a way that ensures the destruction of those gases. In the case of recovery of those gases, the recovery shall be carried out only by appropriately qualified natural persons.
Where removal of the foams referred to in the first subparagraph is not technically feasible, the building owner or contractor shall draw up documentation providing evidence on the infeasibility of the removal in the specific case. Such documentation shall be kept for 5 years and shall be made available, upon request, to the competent authority of the Member State concerned or to the Commission.
10.   Operators of products and equipment not listed in paragraph 2, 3, 8 or 9 that contain fluorinated greenhouse gases listed in Annex I and in Section 1 of Annex II shall arrange for the recovery of the gases, unless it can be established that it is not technically feasible or entails disproportionate costs. The operators shall ensure that the recovery is carried out by appropriately qualified natural persons, so that the gases are recycled, reclaimed or destroyed or shall arrange for their destruction without prior recovery.
The recovery of fluorinated greenhouse gases listed in Annex I and in Section 1 of Annex II from air-conditioning equipment in road vehicles outside the scope of Directive 2006/40/EC shall be carried out only by natural persons holding at least a training attestation in accordance with Article 10(1), second subparagraph, of this Regulation.
11.   Fluorinated greenhouse gases listed in Section 1 of Annex I, and products and equipment containing such gases, shall be destroyed only by destruction technology that has been approved by the Parties to the Protocol.
Other fluorinated greenhouse gases for which the destruction technology has not been approved shall be destroyed only by destruction technology that complies with Union and national law on waste and where additional requirements under such law are met.
12.   The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 32 to supplement this Regulation by establishing a list of products and equipment for which the recovery of fluorinated greenhouse gases listed in Annex I and in Section 1 of Annex II or destruction of products and equipment containing such gases without prior recovery of those gases shall be considered technically and economically feasible, specifying, if appropriate, the technology to be applied.
13.   Member States shall promote the recovery, recycling, reclamation and destruction of fluorinated greenhouse gases listed in Annexes I and II.
