Article 26
Reporting by undertakings
1.   By 31 March 2025 and every year thereafter, each producer, importer and exporter that produced, imported or exported hydrofluorocarbons or quantities exceeding one metric tonne or 100 tonnes of CO2 equivalent of other fluorinated greenhouse gases during the preceding calendar year shall report to the Commission the data specified in Annex IX on each of those substances for that calendar year. This paragraph shall also apply to all undertakings receiving quota pursuant to Article 21(1).
By 31 March 2024 and every year thereafter, each producer or importer that has been allocated quota pursuant to Article 17(4), or to whom quota has been transferred pursuant to Article 21(1), but has not placed any quantities of hydrofluorocarbons on the market during the preceding calendar year, shall report to the Commission by submitting a ‘nil-report’.
2.   By 31 March 2025 and every year thereafter, each undertaking that destroyed hydrofluorocarbons or quantities of other fluorinated greenhouse gases exceeding one metric tonne or 100 tonnes of CO2 equivalent during the preceding calendar year shall report to the Commission the data specified in Annex IX on each of those substances for that calendar year.
3.   By 31 March 2025, each undertaking that used 1 000 tonnes of CO2 equivalent or more of fluorinated greenhouse gases listed in Annex I as feedstock during the preceding calendar year shall report to the Commission the data specified in Annex IX on each of those substances for that calendar year.
4.   By 31 March 2025, each undertaking that placed 10 tonnes of CO2 equivalent or more of hydrofluorocarbons, or 100 tonnes of CO2 equivalent or more of other fluorinated greenhouse gases, contained in products or equipment on the market during the preceding calendar year shall report to the Commission the data specified in Annex IX on each of those substances for that calendar year.
5.   By 31 March 2025 and every year thereafter, each undertaking that received any quantities of hydrofluorocarbons referred to in Article 16(2) shall report to the Commission the data specified in Annex IX on each of those substances for that calendar year.
By 31 March 2025 and every year thereafter, each producer or importer that placed on the market hydrofluorocarbons for the purpose of producing metered dose inhalers for the delivery of pharmaceutical ingredients shall report to the Commission the data specified in Annex IX. The manufacturers of such metered dose inhalers shall report to the Commission the data specified in Annex IX on the hydrofluorocarbons received.
6.   By 31 March 2025 and every year thereafter, each undertaking that reclaimed quantities exceeding 1 metric tonne or 100 tonnes of CO2 equivalent of fluorinated greenhouse gases shall report to the Commission the data specified in Annex IX on each of those substances for that calendar year.
7.   By 30 April 2025, each importer of equipment that placed on the market pre-charged equipment as referred to in Article 19 containing at least 1 000 tonnes of CO2 equivalent hydrofluorocarbons, and where those hydrofluorocarbons have not been placed on the market prior to the charging of the equipment, shall submit to the Commission a verification report issued pursuant to Article 19(3).
8.   By 30 April 2025 and every year thereafter, each undertaking which, under paragraph 1, reports on the placing on the market of 1 000 tonnes of CO2 equivalent or more of hydrofluorocarbons during the preceding calendar year shall, in addition, ensure that the veracity of its report is confirmed, at a reasonable level of assurance, by an independent auditor. The auditor shall be registered in the F-gas Portal and shall be accredited:
(a)
pursuant to Directive 2003/87/EC; or
(b)
to verify financial statements in accordance with the legislation of the Member State concerned.
The transactions referred to in Article 16(2), point (c), shall be verified regardless of the quantities involved.
The Commission may request an undertaking to ensure that the veracity of its report is confirmed by an independent auditor at a reasonable level of assurance, regardless of the quantities involved, where it is needed to confirm that undertaking’s compliance with this Regulation.
The Commission may, by means of implementing acts, specify the details of the verification of reports and of the accreditation of auditors. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 34(2).
9.   All reporting and verification referred to in this Article shall be carried out via the F-gas Portal.
The Commission may, by means of implementing acts, determine the format of submitting the reports referred to in this Article. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 34(2).
