Article 57
Large infrastructure projects
1.   Interreg programmes under this Chapter may support large infrastructure projects meaning operations comprising a set of works, activities or services intended to fulfil an indivisible function of a precise nature pursuing clearly identified objectives of common interest for the purposes of implementing investments delivering a cross-border impact and benefits and where a budget share of a total cost of at least EUR 2 500 000 is allocated to the acquisition, construction or modernisation of infrastructure.
2.   Each beneficiary implementing a large infrastructure project or a part thereof shall apply the applicable public procurement rules.
3.   The Member State hosting the managing authority of the relevant Interreg programme shall send to the Commission a list of planned large infrastructure projects indicating the prospective name, location, budget and lead partner. That list shall be sent as a separate document either when transmitting the signed copy of the financing agreement or a copy of the implementing agreement as referred to in Article 59 to the Commission or at the latest two months before the meeting of the monitoring committee or, if applicable, the steering committee selecting the first of the envisaged large infrastructure projects.
4.   Where the selection of one or more large infrastructure projects is on the agenda of a monitoring committee or, where applicable, steering committee meeting, the managing authority shall transmit a concept note for each such project to the Commission, for information, at the latest two months before the date of the meeting. The concept note shall be a maximum of three pages and shall indicate the name, the location, the budget, the lead partner and the partners as well as the main objectives and deliverables thereof. If the concept note concerning one or more large infrastructure projects is not transmitted to the Commission by that deadline, the Commission may request that the chair of the monitoring committee or steering committee remove the projects concerned from the agenda of the meeting.
