Article 19
Amendment of Interreg programmes
1.   Following the consultation of and the approval by the monitoring committee and in compliance with Article 8 of Regulation (EU) 2021/1060, the managing authority may submit a reasoned request for an amendment of an Interreg programme together with the amended programme, setting out the expected impact of that amendment on the achievement of the objectives.
2.   The Commission shall assess the compliance of the requested amendment with Regulations (EU) 2021/1060 and (EU) 2021/1058 and this Regulation and may make observations within two months of the submission of the amended programme.
3.   The participating Member States and, where applicable, third countries, partner countries or OCTs shall review the amended programme and take into account the observations made by the Commission.
4.   The Commission shall adopt a decision by means of an implementing act approving the amendment of an Interreg programme not later than four months after its submission by the managing authority.
5.   Following the consultation of and the approval by the monitoring committee and in compliance with Article 8 of Regulation (EU) 2021/1060, the managing authority may transfer during the programming period an amount of up to 10 % of the initial allocation of a priority and no more than 5 % of the programme budget to another priority of the same Interreg programme.
Such transfers shall not affect previous years.
The transfer and related changes shall not be considered substantial and shall not require a decision of the Commission amending the Interreg programme. They shall, however, comply with all regulatory requirements. The managing authority shall submit to the Commission the revised table referred to in point (f)(ii) of Article 17(3) together with any related changes in the programme.
6.   The approval of the Commission shall not be required for corrections of a purely clerical or editorial nature that do not affect the implementation of the Interreg programme. The managing authority shall inform the Commission of such corrections.

SECTION II



Territorial Development


