Article 60
Third country, partner country or OCT contribution other than co-financing
1.   Where a third country, partner country or OCT transfers to the managing authority a financial contribution to support the Interreg programme, other than its co-financing of the Union support to the Interreg programme, the rules concerning that financial contribution shall be contained in the following document:
(a)
where the Member State concerned signs the financing agreement pursuant to point (a) of Article 59(4), in one of the following:
(i)
a distinct part of that financing agreement; or
(ii)
in a separate implementing agreement signed either between the Member State hosting the managing authority and the third country, partner country or OCT or directly between the managing authority and the competent authority in the third country, partner country or OCT; and
(b)
where the Member State concerned signs an implementing agreement pursuant to point (b) of Article 59(4), in one of the following:
(i)
a distinct part of that implementing agreement; or
(ii)
an additional implementing agreement signed between the same parties referred to in point (a).
For the purposes of point (b)(i) of the first subparagraph, sections of the implementing agreement may, where applicable, cover both the transferred financial contribution and the Union support to the Interreg programme.
2.   An implementing agreement provided for in paragraph 1 of this Article shall at least contain the elements concerning the third country’s, partner country’s or OCT’s co-financing listed in Article 59(5).
In addition, it shall set out both of the following:
(a)
the amount of the additional financial contribution; and
(b)
the intended use and conditions for its use, including conditions for applications for that additional contribution.
3.   With regard to the PEACE PLUS cross-border programme, the financial contribution to Union activities from the United Kingdom in the form of external assigned revenue as referred to in point (e) of Article 21(2) of the Financial Regulation shall be part of the budget appropriations for Heading 2 ‘Cohesion and Values’, sub-ceiling ‘Economic, social and territorial cohesion’.
That contribution shall be subject to a specific financing agreement with the United Kingdom in accordance with Article 59 of this Regulation. The Commission and the United Kingdom as well as Ireland shall be parties to this specific financing agreement.
The specific financing agreement shall be concluded before the beginning of the implementation of the programme, thus allowing the Special EU Programmes Body to apply the Union legislation applicable to the implementation of the programme.
CHAPTER IX

SPECIFIC PROVISIONS FOR INDIRECT MANAGEMENT

