Article 46
Functions of the managing authority
1.   The managing authority of an Interreg programme shall carry out the functions laid down in Articles 72, 74 and 75 of Regulation (EU) 2021/1060, with the exception of the task of selecting operations referred to in point (a) of Article 72(1) and Article 73 of that Regulation and, where the accounting function is carried out by a different body pursuant to Article 47 of this Regulation, of payments to beneficiaries referred to in point (b) of Article 74(1) of Regulation (EU) 2021/1060. Those functions shall be carried out in the whole territory covered by that programme, subject to derogations set out pursuant to Chapter VIII of this Regulation.
2.   The managing authority, after consultation with the Member States and, where applicable, any third countries, partner countries or OCTs participating in the Interreg programme, shall set up a joint secretariat, with staff taking into account the programme partnership.
The joint secretariat shall assist the managing authority and the monitoring committee in carrying out their respective functions. The joint secretariat shall also provide information to potential beneficiaries about funding opportunities under Interreg programmes and shall assist beneficiaries and partners in the implementation of operations.
For Interreg programmes also supported by external financing instruments from the Union, one or more branch offices of the joint secretariat may be set up in one or more partner countries or OCTs in order to carry out its tasks closer to potential beneficiaries and partners from the partner country or OCT, respectively.
3.   By way of derogation to point (a) of Article 74(1) of Regulation (EU) 2021/1060 and without prejudice to Article 45(5) of this Regulation, the Member States, and where applicable, the third country, partner country or OCT, participating in the Interreg programme, may decide that management verifications referred to in point (a) of Article 74(1) of Regulation (EU) 2021/1060 are to be done through the identification by each Member State of a body or person responsible for this verification on its territory (the ‘controller’).
4.   The controllers may be the same bodies responsible for carrying out such verifications for the programmes under the Investment for jobs and growth goal or, in the case of third countries, partner countries or OCTs for carrying out comparable verifications under external financing instruments of the Union. Any controller shall be functionally independent from the audit authority or any member of the group of auditors.
5.   Where it has been decided that management verifications are carried out by identified controllers pursuant to paragraph 4, the managing authority shall satisfy itself that the expenditure of beneficiaries participating in an operation has been verified by an identified controller.
6.   Each Member State, third country, partner country or OCT shall ensure that the expenditure of a beneficiary can be verified within a period of three months of the submission of the documents by the beneficiary concerned.
7.   Each Member State, third country, partner country or OCT shall be responsible for verifications carried out on its territory.
8.   Each Member State, third country, partner country and OCT shall identify as controller either a national or regional authority or a private body or a natural person as set out in paragraph 9.
9.   Where the controller carrying out management verifications is a private body or a natural person, those controllers shall meet at least one of the following requirements:
(a)
be a member of a national accounting or auditing body or institution which in turn is a member of International Federation of Accountants (IFAC);
(b)
be a member of a national accounting or auditing body or institution without being a member of IFAC, but committing to carry out the management verifications in accordance with IFAC standards and ethics;
(c)
be registered as a statutory auditor in the public register of a public oversight body in a Member State in accordance with the principles of public oversight set out in Directive 2006/43/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (21); or
(d)
be registered as a statutory auditor in the public register of a public oversight body in a third country, partner country or OCT, provided this register is subject to principles of public oversight as set out in the legislation of the country concerned.
