Article 37
Rules on eligibility of expenditure
1.   All or part of an Interreg operation may be implemented outside of a Member State, including outside the Union, provided that the Interreg operation contributes to the objectives of the respective Interreg programme.
2.   Without prejudice to the eligibility rules laid down in Articles 63 to 68 of Regulation (EU) 2021/1060, in Articles 5 and 7 of (EU) 2021/1058 or in this Chapter, including in acts adopted thereunder, the participating Member States and, where applicable, third countries, partner countries and OCTs shall, by a joint decision in the monitoring committee, only establish additional rules on eligibility of expenditure for the Interreg programme on categories of expenditure not covered by those provisions. Those additional rules shall cover the Interreg programme as a whole.
However, where an Interreg programme selects operations based on calls for proposals, those additional rules shall be adopted before the calls for proposals are published. In all other cases, those additional rules shall be adopted before operations are selected.
3.   For matters not covered by the eligibility rules laid down in Articles 63 to 68 of Regulation (EU) 2021/1060, in Articles 5 and 7 of Regulation (EU) 2021/1058 and in this Chapter, including in acts adopted thereunder or in rules established in accordance with paragraph 2 of this Article, the national rules of the Member State and, where applicable, of the third countries, partner countries and OCTs in which the expenditure is incurred shall apply.
4.   In the event of a difference of opinion between the managing authority and the audit authority with regard to the eligibility as such of an Interreg operation selected under an Interreg programme, the opinion of the managing authority shall prevail, taking due account of the opinion of the monitoring committee.
5.   OCTs shall not be eligible for support from the ERDF under Interreg programmes, but may participate in those programmes under the conditions set out in this Regulation.
