Article 12
Return of resources and discontinuation
1.   If for 2022 or 2023 an external cross-border programme has not been submitted to the Commission by 31 March of the year concerned, the annual contribution from the ERDF to that programme that has not been re-allocated to another programme submitted under the same category of external cross-border Interreg programmes shall be allocated to the internal cross-border Interreg programmes in which the Member State concerned participates.
2.   If, by 31 March 2024, there are still external cross-border Interreg programmes which have not been submitted to the Commission, the contribution from the ERDF referred to in Article 9(5) to those programmes for the remaining years up to 2027, which has not been re-allocated to another Interreg programme also supported by IPA III CBC or NDICI-CBC, respectively, shall be allocated to the internal cross-border Interreg programmes in which the Member State concerned participates.
3.   Any external cross-border Interreg programme already approved by the Commission shall be discontinued or the allocation to that programme shall be reduced, in accordance with the applicable rules and procedures, in particular if:
(a)
none of the partner countries covered by the Interreg programme concerned has signed the relevant financing agreement by the deadlines set out in accordance with Article 59; or
(b)
the Interreg programme cannot be implemented as planned due to problems in relations between the participating countries.
In such cases, the contribution from the ERDF referred to in paragraph 1 corresponding to annual instalments not yet committed, or annual instalments committed and decommitted totally or partially during the same budgetary year, which have not been re-allocated to another Interreg programme also supported by IPA III CBC or NDICI-CBC, respectively, shall be allocated to the internal cross-border Interreg programmes in which the Member State concerned participates.
4.   With regard to an Interreg B programme already approved by the Commission, the participation of a partner country or of an OCT shall be discontinued if one of the situations set out in points (a) or (b) of the first subparagraph of paragraph 3 is fulfilled.
The participating Member States and, where applicable, the remaining participating partner countries, shall request that:
(a)
the Interreg programme be discontinued, in particular where the main joint development challenges thereof cannot be achieved without the participation of that partner country or OCT;
(b)
the allocation to that Interreg programme be reduced, in accordance with the applicable rules and procedures; or
(c)
the Interreg programme be continued without the participation of that partner country or OCT.
Where the allocation to the Interreg programme is reduced pursuant to point (b), the contribution from the ERDF corresponding to annual instalments not yet committed, shall be allocated to another Interreg B programme in which one or more of the Member States concerned participate or, where a Member State only participates in one Interreg B programme, to one or more internal cross-border Interreg programmes in which that Member State participates.
5.   The contribution from IPA III, NDICI or OCTP reduced pursuant to this Article shall be used in accordance with the IPA III Regulation, Regulation (EU) 2021/947 or Decision 2013/755/EU, respectively.
6.   Where a third country, partner country or OCT which contributes to an Interreg programme with national resources which do not constitute the national co-financing of support from the ERDF or from an external financing instrument of the Union, reduces that contribution during the implementation of the Interreg programme, either globally or with regard to joint operations already selected and having received the document provided for in Article 22(6), the participating Member State or Member States shall request one of the options set out in the second subparagraph of paragraph 4 of this Article.
