Article 10
Cross-fund provisions
1.   The Commission shall adopt implementing acts setting out the multi-annual strategy documents with regard to external cross-border and transnational cooperation programmes supported by the ERDF and NDICI, by the ERDF and IPA III, or by the ERDF, NDICI and IPA III. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the advisory procedure referred to in Article 63(2) of this Regulation and, where appropriate, with due respect for the procedure set out in the IPA III Regulation.
With regard to Interreg programmes supported by the ERDF and the NDICI, the implementing act shall set out the elements referred to in Article 14(2) of Regulation (EU) 2021/947.
With regard to Interreg programmes supported by the ERDF and IPA III, the implementing act shall also cover, where relevant, the participation of IPA III beneficiaries or partner countries in Interreg C and D programmes.
2.   The contribution from the ERDF to external cross-border Interreg programmes to be also supported from the financial envelope under IPA III-CBC or from the financial envelope under NDICI-CBC shall be established by the Commission and the Member States concerned. The ERDF contribution established for each Member State shall not subsequently be reallocated between the Member States concerned.
The respective contributions from IPA III and NDICI to Interreg B, C and D programmes shall take account of the composition of the programme partnership by Member States, IPA III beneficiaries and partner countries. Those contributions may be set out in the multi-annual strategy documents covered by the first subparagraph of paragraph 1.
3.   Support from the ERDF shall be granted to individual external cross-border programmes provided that at least equivalent amounts are provided by IPA III CBC and NDICI-CBC under the relevant multi-annual strategy document. That contribution shall be subject to a maximum amount set out in the IPA III Regulation or Regulation (EU) 2021/947.
However, where the review of the relevant strategic programming documents under IPA III or NDICI results in the reduction of the matching amount for the remaining years, each Member State concerned shall choose from the following options:
(a)
to request the mechanism referred to in Article 12(3);
(b)
to continue the Interreg programme with the remaining support from the ERDF and IPA III CBC or NDICI-CBC; or
(c)
to combine the options referred to in points (a) and (b) of this subparagraph.
4.   The annual appropriations corresponding to the support from the ERDF, IPA III CBC or NDICI-CBC to external cross-border Interreg programmes shall be entered in the relevant budget lines for the 2021 budgetary exercise.
5.   Where the Commission has included a specific financial allocation to assist partner countries or regions under Regulation (EU) 2021/947 and OCTs under Decision 2013/755/EU, or both, in strengthening their cooperation with neighbouring outermost regions of the Union in accordance with Article 33(2) of Regulation (EU) 2021/947 or Article 87 of Decision 2013/755/EU, or both, the ERDF may also contribute in accordance with this Regulation, where appropriate and on the basis of reciprocity and proportionality as regards the level of funding from the NDICI or the OCTP, or both, to actions implemented by a partner country or region or any other entity under Regulation (EU) 2021/947, by a country, territory or any other entity under Decision 2013/755/EU or by a Union outermost region under, in particular, one or more joint Interreg B, C or D programmes or under cooperation measures referred to in Article 59 of this Regulation that are established and implemented pursuant to this Regulation.
