Article 32
Transmission of data
1.   Each managing authority shall electronically transmit to the Commission cumulative data for the respective Interreg programme by 31 January, 30 April, 31 July and 31 October of each year in accordance with the template set out in Annex VII to Regulation (EU) 2021/1060, with the exception of the information required in point (b) of paragraph 2 and in paragraph 3 of this Article that shall be transmitted by 31 January and 31 July of each year.
The first transmission shall be due by 31 January 2022 and the last one by 31 January 2030.
2.   The data referred to in paragraph 1 shall be broken down for each priority by specific objective and shall refer to:
(a)
the number of selected Interreg operations, their total eligible cost, the contribution from the respective Interreg fund and the total eligible expenditure declared by the lead partners to the managing authority, all broken down by type of intervention;
(b)
the values of output and result indicators for selected Interreg operations and values achieved by finalised Interreg operations.
3.   For financial instruments, data shall also be provided on the following:
(a)
eligible expenditure by type of financial product;
(b)
the amount of management costs and fees declared as eligible expenditure;
(c)
the amount, by type of financial product, of private and public resources mobilised in addition to the funds;
(d)
interest and other gains generated by support from the Interreg funds to financial instruments as referred to in Article 60 of Regulation (EU) 2021/1060 and resources returned attributable to support from the Interreg funds as referred to in Article 62 of that Regulation:
(e)
the total value of loans, equity or quasi-equity investments in final recipients which were guaranteed with programme resources and which were actually disbursed to final recipients.
4.   The data submitted in accordance with this Article shall be reliable and reflect the data available in the electronic system referred to in point (e) of Article 72(1) of Regulation (EU) 2021/1060 as of the end of the month preceding the month of submission.
5.   The managing authority shall publish or provide a link to all the data transmitted to the Commission on the website referred to in Article 36(2).
