Article 59
Conclusion of financing agreements under shared management
1.   In order to implement an Interreg programme in a third country, partner country or OCT, in accordance with Article 112(4) of the Financial Regulation, a financing agreement shall be concluded between the Commission, representing the Union, and each participating third country, partner country or OCT represented in accordance with its national legal framework.
2.   Any financing agreement shall be concluded by 31 December of the year following the year when the first budget commitment was made and shall be considered to be concluded on the date when the last party has signed it.
Any financing agreement shall enter into force either on the date:
(a)
when the last party has signed it; or
(b)
when the third or partner country or OCT has completed the procedure required for ratification in accordance with its national legal framework and has informed the Commission.
3.   The Commission shall provide the draft financing agreement when approving the external programme.
Where an Interreg programme involves more than one third country, partner country or OCT, at least one financing agreement shall be concluded by both parties before the date specified in paragraph 2. The other third countries, partner countries or OCTs may sign their respective financing agreements at the latest on 30 June of the second year following the year when the first budget commitment was made.
4.   The Member State hosting the managing authority of the relevant Interreg programme either:
(a)
may also sign the financing agreement; or
(b)
shall sign, without delay, an implementing agreement with each third country, partner country or OCT participating in that Interreg programme setting out the mutual rights and obligations with regard to its implementation and financial management.
5.   An implementing agreement signed pursuant to point (b) of paragraph 4 shall at least cover the following elements:
(a)
detailed arrangements for payments;
(b)
financial management;
(c)
record keeping;
d)
reporting obligations;
(e)
verifications, controls and audit; and
(f)
irregularities and recoveries.
6.   Where the Member State hosting the managing authority of the Interreg programme decides to sign the financing agreement pursuant to point (a) of paragraph 4 of this Article, that financing agreement shall be considered to be a tool to implement the Union budget in accordance with the Financial Regulation and not an international agreement as referred to in Articles 216 to 219 TFEU.
