Article 14
Interreg-specific objectives
1.   The ERDF, within its scope as set out in Article 5 of Regulation (EU) 2021/1058, and, where applicable, the external financing instruments of the Union shall contribute to the policy objectives set out in Article 5(1) of Regulation (EU) 2021/1060 through joint actions under Interreg programmes.
2.   In the case of the PEACE PLUS cross-border programme, where it is acting in support of peace and reconciliation, the ERDF, as a specific objective under policy objective 4, shall also contribute to promoting social, economic and regional stability in the regions concerned, in particular through actions to promote cohesion between communities. A separate priority shall support that specific objective.
3.   In addition to the specific objectives for the ERDF as set out in Article 3 of Regulation (EU) 2021/1058, the ERDF and, where applicable, the external financing instruments of the Union shall also contribute to the specific objectives (a) to (l) of Article 4(1) of Regulation (EU) 2021/1057 through joint actions under Interreg programmes.
4.   Under Interreg programmes, the ERDF and, where applicable, the external financing instruments of the Union, may also support the Interreg-specific objective of ‘a better cooperation governance’, by one or more of the following actions:
(a)
enhance the institutional capacity of public authorities, in particular those mandated to manage a specific territory, and of stakeholders (all strands);
(b)
enhance efficient public administration by promoting legal and administrative cooperation and cooperation between citizens, civil society actors and institutions, in particular with a view to resolving legal and other obstacles in border regions (strands A, C, D and, where appropriate, strand B);
(c)
build up mutual trust, in particular by encouraging people-to-people actions (strands A, D and, where appropriate, strand B);
(d)
enhance institutional capacity of public authorities and stakeholders to implement macro-regional strategies and sea-basin strategies, as well as other territorial strategies (all strands);
(e)
enhance sustainable democracy and support civil society actors and their role in reforming processes and democratic transitions (all strands with involvement of third countries, partner countries or OCTs); and
(f)
other actions to support better cooperation governance (all strands).
5.   Under Interreg programmes, the ERDF and, where applicable, the external financing instruments of the Union, may also contribute to the Interreg-specific objective of ‘a safer and more secure Europe’, in particular by actions in the fields of border crossing management and mobility and migration management, including the protection and economic and social integration of third-country nationals, for example migrants and beneficiaries of international protection.
