Article 49
Audit of operations
1.   The Commission shall select a common sample of operations, or other sampling units, using a statistical sampling method for the audits of operations to be carried out by the audit authorities for the Interreg programmes receiving support from the ERDF or an external financing instrument of the Union in respect of each accounting year.
The common sample shall be representative of all the Interreg programmes constituting the population.
For the purposes of selecting the common sample, the Commission may stratify groups of Interreg programmes according to their specific risks.
2.   The programme authorities shall provide the information necessary for the selection of a common sample to the Commission by 1 August following the end of each accounting year.
That information shall be submitted in a standardised electronic format, shall be complete and shall reconcile with the expenditure declared to the Commission for the reference accounting year.
3.   Without prejudice to the requirement to carry out an audit as referred to in Article 48(2), the audit authorities for Interreg programmes covered by the common sample shall not carry out additional audits of operations under those programmes, unless requested to do so by the Commission in accordance with paragraph 8 of this Article or in cases for which an audit authority has identified specific risks.
4.   The Commission shall inform the audit authorities of the Interreg programmes concerned of the common sample selected in sufficient time to allow these authorities to carry out the audits of operations, in general, by 1 September following the end of each accounting year.
5.   The audit authorities concerned shall submit information on the results of these audits as well as on any financial correction taken in relation to individual irregularities detected, at the latest in the annual control reports to be submitted to the Commission pursuant to Article 48(6) and (7).
6.   Following its assessment of the results of audits of operations selected pursuant to paragraph 1, the Commission shall calculate a global extrapolated error rate with regard to the Interreg programmes included in the population from which the common sample was selected, for the purposes of its own assurance process.
7.   Where the global extrapolated error rate referred to in paragraph 6 is above 2 % of the total expenditure declared for the Interreg programmes included in the population from which the common sample was selected, the Commission shall calculate a global residual error rate, taking account of financial corrections applied by the respective Interreg programme authorities for individual irregularities detected by the audits of operations selected pursuant to paragraph 1.
8.   Where the global residual error rate referred to in paragraph 7 is more than 2 % of the expenditure declared for the Interreg programmes included in the population from which the common sample was selected, the Commission shall determine whether it is necessary to request the audit authority of a specific Interreg programme or a group of Interreg programmes most affected to carry out additional audit work in order to further evaluate the error rate and assess the required corrective measures for the Interreg programmes affected by the irregularities detected.
9.   Based on the assessment of the results of the additional audit work requested pursuant to paragraph 8 of this Article, the Commission may request additional financial corrections to be applied on the Interreg programmes affected by the irregularities detected. In such cases, the Interreg programme authorities shall carry out the required financial corrections in accordance with Article 103 of Regulation (EU) 2021/1060.
10.   Each audit authority of an Interreg programme for which the information referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article is missing or incomplete or has not been submitted by the deadline laid down in the first subparagraph of that paragraph shall carry out a separate sampling exercise for the respective Interreg programme in accordance with Article 79 of Regulation (EU) 2021/1060.
