Article 36
Responsibilities of managing authorities and partners with regard to transparency and communication
1.   Each managing authority shall identify a communication officer for each Interreg programme. A communication officer may be responsible for more than one programme.
2.   The managing authority shall ensure that, within six months of the Interreg programme’s approval pursuant to Article 18, there is a website where information on each Interreg programme under its responsibility is available, covering the programme’s objectives, activities, available funding opportunities and achievements.
3.   Article 49(2) to (6) of Regulation (EU) 2021/1060 on the responsibilities of the managing authority shall apply.
4.   Each partner of an Interreg operation or each body implementing a financing instrument shall acknowledge support from an Interreg fund, including resources reused for financial instruments in accordance with Article 62 of Regulation (EU) 2021/1060, to the Interreg operation by:
(a)
providing on the partner’s official website or social media sites, where such sites exist, a short description of the Interreg operation, proportionate to the level of support provided by an Interreg fund, including its aims and results, and highlighting the financial support from the Interreg fund;
(b)
providing a statement highlighting the support from an Interreg fund in a visible manner on documents and communication material relating to the implementation of the Interreg operation, intended for the general public or for participants;
(c)
displaying durable plaques or billboards clearly visible to the public, presenting the emblem of the Union in accordance with the technical characteristics laid down in Annex IX of Regulation (EU) 2021/1060, as soon as the physical implementation of an Interreg operation involving physical investment or the purchase of equipment starts or purchased equipment is installed, with regard to operations supported by an Interreg fund, the total cost of which exceeds EUR 100 000;
(d)
for Interreg operations not falling under point (c), publicly displaying at least one poster of a minimum size A3 or equivalent electronic display with information about the Interreg operation highlighting the support from an Interreg fund, except where the beneficiary is a natural person;
(e)
for operations of strategic importance and operations whose total cost exceed EUR 5 000 000 organising a communication event and involving the Commission and the responsible managing authority in a timely manner.
The term ‘Interreg’ shall be used next to the emblem of the Union in accordance with Article 47 of Regulation (EU) 2021/1060.
5.   For small project funds and financial instruments, the beneficiary shall ensure by means of the contractual terms that final recipients comply with the requirements to communicate publicly on the Interreg operation.
For financial instruments, the final recipient shall acknowledge the origin and ensure the visibility of the Union funding, in particular when promoting the actions and their results, by providing coherent, effective and targeted information to multiple audiences, including the media and the public.
6.   Where remedial actions have not been put into place, the managing authority shall apply measures, taking into account the principle of proportionality, by cancelling up to 2 % of the support from the funds to:
(a)
the beneficiary concerned who does not comply with its obligations falling under Article 47 of Regulation (EU) 2021/1060 or paragraphs 4 and 5 of this Article; or
(b)
the final recipient concerned who does not comply with the requirements set out in paragraph 5.
