Article 23
Partnership within Interreg operations
1.   Operations selected under Interreg A, B and D programmes shall involve partners from at least two participating countries or OCTs, at least one of which shall be a beneficiary from a Member State.
Operations selected under the Interreg Europe and URBACT programmes shall involve partners from at least three participating countries, at least two of which shall be beneficiaries from Member States.
Beneficiaries receiving support from Interreg funds and partners participating in the operation but not receiving any financial support under those funds (jointly referred to as ‘partners’) constitute an Interreg operation partnership.
2.   An Interreg operation may be implemented in a single country or OCT, provided that the impact on and the benefits for the programme area are identified in the operation application.
3.   Paragraph 1 shall not apply to operations under the PEACE PLUS cross-border programme where the programme is acting in support of peace and reconciliation.
4.   Partners shall cooperate in the development and implementation of Interreg operations, as well as in the staffing or financing, or both, thereof.
For Interreg operations under Interreg D programmes, the partners from outermost regions and third countries, partner countries or OCTs shall be required to cooperate only in two of the four dimensions listed in the first subparagraph.
5.   Where there are two or more partners, one of them shall be designated by all the partners as the lead partner.
6.   A cross-border legal body or an EGTC may be the sole partner of an Interreg operation under Interreg A, B and D programmes, provided that the members thereof involve partners from at least two participating countries.
The cross-border legal body or EGTC shall have members from at least three participating countries under the Interreg Europe and URBACT programmes.
A legal body that implements a financial instrument, a fund of holding funds or a small project fund, as applicable, may be the sole partner of an Interreg operation without the application of the requirements for its composition set out in the first subparagraph.
7.   A sole partner shall be registered in a Member State participating in the Interreg programme.
