Whereas:
(1) Council Directive 78/548/EEC of 12 June 1978 on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to heating systems for the passenger compartment of motor vehicles(4) was adopted as one of the separate directives of the EC type-approval procedure which has been established by Council Directive 70/156/EEC of 6 February 1970 on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the type-approval of motor vehicles and their trailers(5). Consequently, the provisions laid down in Directive 70/156/EEC relating to vehicle systems, components and separate technical units apply to Directive 78/548/EEC.
(2) In particular, under Article 3(4) and Article 4(3) of Directive 70/156/EEC each separate directive is to be accompanied by an information document incorporating the relevant items of Annex I to Directive 70/156/EEC and also a type-approval certificate based on Annex VI thereto in order that type-approval may be computerised.
(3) In the light of technical progress, combustion heaters, usually fuelled by diesel, petrol or liquefied petroleum gas, are now fitted to many types of vehicle in order to provide heat for the passenger compartment (e.g. of buses), the load area (e.g. of trucks and trailers) or the sleeping compartment (e.g. of trucks and motor caravans) so that heat can be provided efficiently and without the noise and gaseous emissions associated with running the propulsion engine when the vehicle is parked. For reasons of safety, it is necessary to extend the scope to include requirements for combustion heaters, and for their installation. Such requirements should correspond to the highest standards consistent with current technology.
(4) It is necessary to provide for type-approval for combustion heaters as components and for vehicles in which a combustion heater is installed.
(5) It will be necessary to supplement this Directive with additional safety requirements for liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) combustion heaters by the addition of an Annex.
(6) The measures necessary for the implementation of this Directive should be adopted in accordance with Council Decision 1999/468/EC of 28 June 1999 laying down the procedures for the exercise of implementing powers conferred on the Commission(6).
(7) For reasons of clarity it is advisable to repeal Directive 78/548/EEC and replace it by this Directive,
HAVE ADOPTED THIS DIRECTIVE:

