Article 57
Sub-Committees
1.   The Joint Committee may establish sub-committees for the purposes of preparing draft joint positions and common acts for the Joint Committee.
2.   Each sub-committee shall be composed of the individuals referred to in Article 55(1), and one high-level representative from the current staff of the relevant competent authority from each Member State.
3.   Each sub-committee shall elect a chairperson from among the representatives of the relevant competent authorities, who shall also be an observer in the Joint Committee.
4.   For the purposes of Article 56, a sub-committee on financial conglomerates to the Joint Committee shall be established.
5.   The Joint Committee shall make public on its website all established sub-committees including their mandates and a list of their members with their respective functions in the sub-committee.’;
(49)
Article 58 is amended as follows:
(a)
paragraph 1 is replaced by the following:
‘1.   The Board of Appeal of the European Supervisory Authorities is hereby established.’;
(b)
in paragraph 2, the first subparagraph is replaced by the following:
‘2.   The Board of Appeal shall be composed of six members and six alternates, who shall be individuals of high repute with a proven record of relevant knowledge of Union law and of having international professional experience, to a sufficiently high level in the fields of banking, insurance, occupational pensions, securities markets or other financial services, excluding current staff of the competent authorities or other national or Union institutions or bodies involved in the activities of the Authority and members of the Securities and Markets Stakeholder Group. Members and alternates shall be nationals of a Member State and shall have a thorough knowledge of at least two official languages of the Union. The Board of Appeal shall have sufficient legal expertise to provide expert legal advice on the legality, including proportionality, of the Authority’s exercise of its powers.’;
(c)
paragraph 3 is replaced by the following:
‘3.   Two members of the Board of Appeal and two alternates shall be appointed by the Management Board of the Authority from a shortlist proposed by the Commission, following a public call for expressions of interest published in the Official Journal of the European Union, and after consultation of the Board of Supervisors.
After having received the shortlist, the European Parliament may invite candidates for members and alternates to make a statement before it and answer any questions from its Members.
The European Parliament may invite the members of the Board of Appeal to make a statement before it and answer any questions from its Members whenever so requested, to the exclusion of statements, questions or answers pertaining to individual cases decided by, or pending before, the Board of Appeal.’;
(50)
in Article 59, paragraph 2 is replaced by the following:
‘2.   Members of the Board of Appeal, and staff of the Authority providing operational and secretariat support, shall not take part in any appeal proceedings in which they have any personal interest, if they have previously been involved as representatives of one of the parties to the proceedings, or if they have participated in the decision under appeal.’;
(51)
in Article 60, paragraph 2 is replaced by the following:
‘2.   The appeal, together with a statement of grounds, shall be filed in writing at the Authority within three months of the date of notification of the decision to the person concerned, or, in the absence of a notification, of the day on which the Authority published its decision.
The Board of Appeal shall decide upon the appeal within three months after the appeal has been lodged.’;
(52)
the following article is inserted:
‘Article 60a
Exceeding of competence by the Authority
Any natural or legal person may send reasoned advice to the Commission if that person is of the opinion that the Authority has exceeded its competence, including by failing to respect the principle of proportionality referred to in Article 1(5), when acting under Articles 16 and 16b, and that is of direct and individual concern to that person.’;
(53)
in Article 62, paragraph 1 is amended as follows:
(a)
the introductory part is replaced by the following:
‘1.   The revenues of the Authority, a European body in accordance with Article 70 of Regulation (EU, Euratom) 2018/1046 of the European Parliament and of the Council (*47) (“the Financial Regulation”), shall consist, in particular, of any combination of the following:

(*47)  Regulation (EU, Euratom) 2018/1046 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 July 2018 on the financial rules applicable to the general budget of the Union, amending Regulations (EU) No 1296/2013, (EU) No 1301/2013, (EU) No 1303/2013, (EU) No 1304/2013, (EU) No 1309/2013, (EU) No 1316/2013, (EU) No 223/2014, (EU) No 283/2014, and Decision No 541/2014/EU and repealing Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012 (OJ L 193, 30.7.2018, p. 1).’;"
                        
(b)
the following points are added:
‘(d)
any voluntary contribution from Member States or observers;
(e)
agreed charges for publications, training and for any other services provided by the Authority where they have been specifically requested by one or more competent authorities.’;
(c)
the following sub-paragraph is added:
‘Any voluntary contribution from Member States or observers referred to in point d of the first sub-paragraph shall not be accepted if such acceptance would cast doubt on the independence and impartiality of the Authority. Voluntary contributions that constitute compensation for the cost of tasks delegated by a competent authority to the Authority shall not be considered to cast doubt on the independence of the latter.’;
(54)
Articles 63, 64 and 65 are replaced by the following:
‘Article 63
Establishment of the budget
1.   Each year, the Executive Director shall draw up a provisional draft single programming document of the Authority for the three following financial years setting out the estimated revenue and expenditure, as well as information on staff, from its annual and multi-annual programming and shall forward it to the Management Board and the Board of Supervisors, together with the establishment plan.
2.   The Board of Supervisors shall, on the basis of the draft which has been approved by the Management Board, adopt the draft single programming document for the three following financial years.
3.   The single programming document shall be transmitted by the Management Board to the Commission, the European Parliament and the Council and to the European Court of Auditors by 31 January.
4.   Taking account of the single programming document, the Commission shall enter in the draft budget of the Union the estimates it deems necessary in respect of the establishment plan and the amount of the balancing contribution to be charged to the general budget of the Union in accordance with Articles 313 and 314 TFEU.
5.   The European Parliament and the Council shall adopt the establishment plan for the Authority. The European Parliament and the Council shall authorise the appropriations for the balancing contribution to the Authority.
6.   The budget of the Authority shall be adopted by the Board of Supervisors. It shall become final after the final adoption of the general budget of the Union. Where necessary, it shall be adjusted accordingly.
7.   The Management Board shall, without undue delay, notify the European Parliament and the Council of its intention to implement any project which may have significant financial implications for the funding of its budget, in particular any project relating to property, such as the rental or purchase of buildings.
8.   Without prejudice to Articles 266 and 267 of the Financial Regulation, authorisation from the European Parliament and the Council shall be required for any project which may have significant financial or long- term implications for the funding of the Authority’s budget, in particular any project relating to property, such as the rental or purchase of buildings, including break clauses.
