Article 42
Independence of the Board of Supervisors
1.   When carrying out the tasks conferred upon them by this Regulation, the members of the Board of Supervisors shall act independently and objectively in the sole interest of the Union as a whole and shall neither seek nor take instructions from Union institutions or bodies, from any government or from any other public or private body.
2.   Member States, Union institutions or bodies, and any other public or private body, shall not seek to influence the members of the Board of Supervisors in the performance of their tasks.
3.   Members of the Board of Supervisors, the Chairperson as well as non-voting representatives and observers participating in the meetings of the Board of Supervisors shall, before such meetings, accurately and completely declare the absence or existence of any interest which might be considered prejudicial to their independence in relation to any items on the agenda, and shall abstain from participating in the discussion of, and voting upon, such points.
4.   The Board of Supervisors shall lay down, in its rules of procedure, the practical arrangements for the rule on declaration of interest referred to in paragraph 3 and for the prevention and the management of conflict of interest.’;
(34)
Article 43 is amended as follows:
(a)
paragraph 1 is replaced by the following:
‘1.   The Board of Supervisors shall give guidance to the work of the Authority and shall be in charge of taking the decisions referred to in Chapter II. The Board of Supervisors shall adopt the opinions, recommendations, guidelines and decisions of the Authority, and issue the advice referred to in Chapter II, based on a proposal of the relevant internal committee or panel, the Chairperson, or of the Management Board, as applicable.’;
(b)
paragraphs 2 and 3 are deleted;
(c)
paragraph 5 is replaced by the following:
‘5.   The Board of Supervisors shall adopt, on the basis of a proposal by the Management Board, the annual report on the activities of the Authority, including on the performance of the Chairperson’s duties, and shall transmit that report to the European Parliament, to the Council, to the Commission, to the Court of Auditors and to the European Economic and Social Committee by 15 June each year. The report shall be made public.’;
(d)
paragraph 8 is replaced by the following:
‘8.   The Board of Supervisors shall exercise disciplinary authority over the Chairperson and the Executive Director. It may remove the Executive Director from office in accordance with Article 51(5).’;
(35)
the following Article is inserted:
‘Article 43a
Transparency of decisions adopted by the Board of Supervisors
Notwithstanding Article 70, within six weeks of each meeting of the Board of Supervisors, the Authority shall, at least, provide the European Parliament with a comprehensive and meaningful record of the proceedings of that meeting that enables a full understanding of the discussions, including an annotated list of decisions. Such record shall not reflect discussions within the Board of Supervisors relating to individual financial institutions, unless otherwise provided for in Article 75(3) or in the legislative acts referred to in Article 1(2).’;
(36)
Article 44 is amended as follows:
(a)
paragraph 1 is replaced by the following:
‘1.   Decisions of the Board of Supervisors shall be taken by a simple majority of its members. Each voting member shall have one vote.
With regard to the acts specified in Articles 10 to 16 of this Regulation and measures and decisions adopted under the third subparagraph of Article 9(5) of this Regulation and Chapter VI of this Regulation and, by way of derogation from the first subparagraph of this paragraph, the Board of Supervisors shall take decisions on the basis of a qualified majority of its members, as defined in Article 16(4) of the Treaty on European Union and in Article 3 of the Protocol No 36 on transitional provisions.
The Chairperson shall not vote on the decisions referred to in the second subparagraph.
With regard to the composition of the panels in accordance with Article 41(2), (3) and (4), and the members of the peer review committee referred to in Article 30(2), the Board of Supervisors, when considering the proposals by the Chairperson, shall strive for consensus. In the absence of consensus, decisions of the Board of Supervisors shall be taken by a majority of three quarters of its voting members. Each voting member shall have one vote.
With regard to decisions adopted under Article 18(3) and (4), and by way of derogation from the first subparagraph of this paragraph, the Board of Supervisors shall take decisions on the basis of a simple majority of its voting members.’;
(b)
paragraph 4 is replaced by the following:
‘4.   With regard to the decisions in accordance with Articles 17, 19 and 30 the Board of Supervisors shall vote on the proposed decisions using a written procedure. The voting members of the Board of Supervisors shall have eight working days to vote. Each voting member shall have one vote. The proposed decision shall be considered adopted unless a simple majority of voting members of the Board of Supervisors objects. Abstentions shall not be counted as approvals or as objections, and shall not be considered when calculating the number of votes cast. If three voting members of the Board of Supervisors object to the written procedure, the draft decision shall be discussed and decided on by the Board of Supervisors in accordance with the procedure set out in paragraph 1 of this Article.
The non-voting members and the observers, with the exception of the Executive Director, shall not attend any discussions within the Board of Supervisors relating to individual financial institutions, unless otherwise provided for in Article 75(3) or in the legislative acts referred to in Article 1(2).’;
(c)
the following paragraph is added:
‘5.   The Authority’s Chairperson shall have the prerogative to call a vote at any time. Without prejudice to that power and to the effectiveness of the Authority’s decision-making procedures, the Board of Supervisors of the Authority shall strive for consensus when taking its decisions.’;
(37)
Article 45 is replaced by the following:
‘Article 45
Composition
1.   The Management Board shall be composed of the Chairperson and six members of the Board of Supervisors, elected by and from the voting members of the Board of Supervisors.
Other than the Chairperson, each member of the Management Board shall have an alternate who may replace him if he is prevented from attending.
2.   The term of office of the members elected by the Board of Supervisors shall be two-and-a-half years. That term may be extended once. The composition of the Management Board shall be gender balanced and proportionate and shall reflect the Union as a whole. Mandates shall be overlapping and an appropriate rotating arrangement shall apply.
3.   Meetings of the Management Board shall be convened by the Chairperson at his or her own initiative or at the request of at least a third of its members, and shall be chaired by the Chairperson. The Management Board shall meet prior to every meeting of the Board of Supervisors and as often as the Management Board deems necessary. It shall meet at least five times a year.
4.   The members of the Management Board may, subject to the rules of procedure, be assisted by advisers or experts. The non-voting members, with the exception of the Executive Director, shall not attend any discussions within the Management Board relating to individual financial institutions.’;
(38)
the following Articles are inserted:
‘Article 45a
Decision-making
1.   Decisions by the Management Board shall be adopted by simple majority of its members whilst striving for consensus. Each member shall have one vote. The Chairperson shall be a voting member.
2.   The Executive Director and a representative of the Commission shall participate in meetings of the Management Board without the right to vote. The representative of the Commission shall have the right to vote on matters referred to in Article 63.
3.   The Management Board shall adopt and make public its rules of procedure.
Article 45b
Coordination Groups
1.   The Management Board may set up coordination groups on its own initiative or upon the request of a competent authority on defined topics for which there may be a need to coordinate having regard to specific market developments. The Management Board shall set up coordination groups on defined topics at the request of five members of the Board of Supervisors.
2.   All competent authorities shall participate in the coordination groups and shall provide, in accordance with Article 35, to the coordination groups the information necessary in order to allow the coordination groups to conduct their coordinating tasks in accordance with their mandate. The work of the coordination groups shall be based on information provided by the competent authorities and any findings identified by the Authority.
3.   The groups shall be chaired by a member of the Management Board. Each year, the respective member of the Management Board in charge of the coordination group shall report to the Board of Supervisors on the main elements of the discussions and findings and, where relevant, make a suggestion for a regulatory follow-up or a peer review in the respective area. Competent authorities shall notify the Authority as to how they have taken into account the work of coordination groups in their activities.
4.   When monitoring market developments that may be the focus of coordination groups, the Authority may request competent authorities in accordance with Article 35 to provide information necessary to allow the Authority to perform its monitoring role.’;
(39)
Article 46 is replaced by the following:
‘Article 46
Independence of the Management Board
The members of the Management Board shall act independently and objectively in the sole interest of the Union as a whole and shall neither seek nor take instructions from the Union institutions or bodies, from any government or from any other public or private body.
Member States, Union institutions or bodies and any other public or private body shall not seek to influence the members of the Management Board in the performance of their tasks.’;
(40)
Article 47 is amended as follows:
(a)
the following paragraph is inserted:
‘3a.   The Management Board may examine, give an opinion on and make proposals on all matters except for tasks laid down in Article 30.’;
(b)
paragraph 6 is replaced by the following:
‘6.   The Management Board shall propose an annual report on the activities of the Authority, including on the Chairperson’s duties, to the Board of Supervisors for approval.’;
(c)
paragraph 8 is replaced by the following:
‘8.   The Management Board shall appoint and remove the members of the Board of Appeal in accordance with Article 58(3) and (5), taking duly into account a proposal by the Board of Supervisors.’;
(d)
the following paragraph is added:
‘9.   The members of the Management Board shall make public all meetings held and any hospitality received. Expenses shall be recorded publicly in accordance with the Staff Regulations.’;
(41)
Article 48 is amended as follows:
(a)
in paragraph 1, the second subparagraph is replaced by the following:
‘The Chairperson shall be responsible for preparing the work of the Board of Supervisors, including setting the agenda to be adopted by the Board of Supervisors, convening the meetings and tabling items for decision, and shall chair the meetings of the Board of Supervisors.
The Chairperson shall be responsible for setting the agenda of the Management Board, to be adopted by the Management Board, and shall chair the meetings of the Management Board.
The Chairperson may invite the Management Board to consider setting up a coordination group in accordance with Article 45b.’;
(b)
paragraph 2 is replaced by the following:
‘2.   The Chairperson shall be selected on the basis of merit, skills, knowledge of financial institutions and markets, and of experience relevant to financial supervision and regulation, following an open selection procedure which shall respect the principle of gender balance and shall be published in the Official Journal of the European Union. The Board of Supervisors shall draw up a shortlist of qualified candidates for the position of the Chairperson, with the assistance of the Commission. Based on the shortlist, the Council shall adopt a decision to appoint the Chairperson, after confirmation by the European Parliament.
Where the Chairperson no longer fulfils the conditions referred to in Article 49 or has been found guilty of serious misconduct, the Council may, acting on a proposal from the Commission which has been approved by the European Parliament, adopt a decision to remove him or her from office.
The Board of Supervisors shall also elect, from among its members, a Vice-Chairperson who shall carry out the functions of the Chairperson in the absence of the Chairperson. That Vice-Chairperson shall not be elected from among the members of the Management Board.’;
(c)
in paragraph 4, the second subparagraph is replaced by the following:
‘For the purpose of the evaluation referred to in the first subparagraph, the tasks of the Chairperson shall be carried out by the Vice-Chairperson.
The Council, acting on a proposal from the Board of Supervisors and with the assistance of the Commission, and taking into account the evaluation referred to in the first subparagraph, may extend the term of office of the Chairperson once.’;
(d)
paragraph 5 is replaced by the following:
‘5.   The Chairperson may be removed from office only on serious grounds. He or she may only be removed by the European Parliament following a decision of the Council, adopted after consulting the Board of Supervisors.’;
(42)
Article 49 is amended as follows:
(a)
the title is replaced by the following:
‘Independence of the Chairperson’;
(b)
the first paragraph is replaced by the following:
‘Without prejudice to the role of the Board of Supervisors in relation to the tasks of the Chairperson, the Chairperson shall neither seek nor take instructions from the Union institutions or bodies, from any government or from any other public or private body.’;
(43)
the following article is inserted:
‘Article 49a
Expenses
The Chairperson shall make public all meetings held with external stakeholders within a period of two weeks following the meeting and any hospitality received. Expenses shall be recorded publicly in accordance with the Staff Regulations.’;
(44)
Article 50 is deleted;
(45)
Article 54 is amended as follows:
(a)
paragraph 2 is amended as follows:
(i)
the introductory part is replaced by the following:
‘2.   The Joint Committee shall serve as a forum in which the Authority shall cooperate regularly and closely to ensure cross-sectoral consistency, while considering sectoral specificities, with the European Supervisory Authority (European Banking Authority) and the European Supervisory Authority (European Securities and Markets Authority), in particular regarding:’;
(ii)
the first indent is replaced by the following:
‘—
financial conglomerates and, where required by Union law, prudential consolidation,’;
(iii)
the fifth indent is replaced by the following:
‘—
cybersecurity,’;
(iv)
the sixth indent is replaced by the following:
‘—
information and best practice exchange with the ESRB and the other ESAs,’;
(v)
the following indents are added:
‘—
retail financial services and consumer and investor protection issues;
—
advice by the Committee established in accordance with Article 1(7).’;
(b)
the following paragraph is inserted:
‘2a.   The Joint Committee may assist the Commission in assessing the conditions and the technical specifications and procedures for ensuring secure and efficient inter-connection of the centralised automated mechanisms pursuant to the report referred in Article 32a(5) of Directive (EU) 2015/849 as well as in the effective interconnection of the national registers under that Directive.’;
(c)
paragraph 3 is replaced by the following:
‘3.   The Joint Committee shall have a dedicated staff provided by the ESAs that shall act as a permanent secretariat. The Authority shall contribute adequate resources to administrative, infrastructure and operational expenses.’;
(46)
Article 55 is amended as follows:
(a)
paragraph 3 is replaced by the following:
‘3.   The Chairperson of the Joint Committee shall be appointed on an annual rotational basis from among the Chairpersons of the ESAs. The Chairperson of the Joint Committee shall be the second Vice-Chair of the ESRB.’;
(b)
in paragraph 4, the second subparagraph is replaced by the following:
‘The Joint Committee shall meet at least once every three months.’;
(c)
the following paragraph is added:
‘5.   The Chairperson of the Authority shall regularly inform the Board of Supervisors on positions taken in the meetings of the Joint Committee.’;
(47)
Articles 56 and 57 are replaced by the following:
‘Article 56
Joint positions and common acts
Within the scope of its tasks set out in Chapter II of this Regulation, and in particular with respect to the implementation of Directive 2002/87/EC, where relevant, the Authority shall reach joint positions by consensus with, as appropriate, the European Supervisory Authority (European Banking Authority) and with the European Supervisory Authority (European Securities and Markets Authority).
Where required by Union law, measures pursuant to Articles 10 to 16, and decisions pursuant to Articles 17, 18 and 19, of this Regulation in relation to the application of Directive 2002/87/EC and of any other legislative acts referred to in Article 1(2) of this Regulation that also fall within the area of competence of the European Supervisory Authority (European Banking Authority) or the European Supervisory Authority (European Securities and Markets Authority) shall be adopted, in parallel, by, as appropriate, the Authority, the European Supervisory Authority (European Banking Authority) and the European Supervisory Authority (European Securities and Markets Authority).
