Article 11
Changes, review, update and withdrawal of storage permits
1.   The operator shall inform the competent authority of any changes planned in the operation of the storage site, including changes concerning the operator. Where appropriate, the competent authority shall update the storage permit or the permit conditions.
2.   Member States shall ensure that no substantial change is implemented without a new or updated storage permit issued in accordance with this Directive. Annex II, point 13, first indent of Directive 85/337/EEC shall apply in such cases.
3.   The competent authority shall review and where necessary update or, as a last resort, withdraw the storage permit:
(a)
if it has been notified or made aware of any leakages or significant irregularities pursuant to Article 16(1);
(b)
if the reports submitted pursuant to Article 14 or the environmental inspections carried out pursuant to Article 15 show non-compliance with permit conditions or risks of leakages or significant irregularities;
(c)
if it is aware of any other failure by the operator to meet the permit conditions;
(d)
if it appears necessary on the basis of the latest scientific findings and technological progress; or
(e)
without prejudice to points (a) to (d), five years after issuing the permit and every 10 years thereafter.
4.   After a permit has been withdrawn pursuant to paragraph 3, the competent authority shall either issue a new storage permit or close the storage site pursuant to Article 17(1)(c). Until a new storage permit has been issued, the competent authority shall temporarily take over all legal obligations relating to acceptance criteria where the competent authority decides to continue CO2 injections, monitoring and corrective measures pursuant to the requirements laid down in this Directive, the surrender of allowances in cases of leakage pursuant to Directive 2003/87/EC and preventive and remedial action pursuant to Articles 5(1) and 6(1) of Directive 2004/35/EC. The competent authority shall recover any costs incurred from the former operator, including by drawing on the financial security referred to in Article 19. In case of closure of the storage site pursuant to Article 17(1)(c), Article 17(4) shall apply.
