Article 17
Closure and post-closure obligations
1.   A storage site shall be closed:
(a)
if the relevant conditions stated in the permit have been met;
(b)
at the substantiated request of the operator, after authorisation of the competent authority; or
(c)
if the competent authority so decides after the withdrawal of a storage permit pursuant to Article 11(3).
2.   After a storage site has been closed pursuant to points (a) or (b) of paragraph 1, the operator remains responsible for monitoring, reporting and corrective measures, pursuant to the requirements laid down in this Directive, and for all obligations relating to the surrender of allowances in case of leakages pursuant to Directive 2003/87/EC and preventive and remedial actions pursuant to Articles 5 to 8 of Directive 2004/35/EC until the responsibility for the storage site is transferred to the competent authority pursuant to Article 18(1) to (5) of this Directive. The operator shall also be responsible for sealing the storage site and removing the injection facilities.
3.   The obligations referred to in paragraph 2 shall be fulfilled on the basis of a post-closure plan designed by the operator based on best practice and in accordance with the requirements laid down in Annex II. A provisional post-closure plan shall be submitted to and approved by the competent authority pursuant to Article 7(8) and Article 9(7). Prior to the closure of a storage site pursuant to points (a) or (b) of paragraph 1 of this Article, the provisional post-closure plan shall be:
(a)
updated as necessary, taking account of risk analysis, best practice and technological improvements;
(b)
submitted to the competent authority for its approval; and
(c)
approved by the competent authority as the definitive post-closure plan.
4.   After a storage site has been closed pursuant to paragraph 1(c), the competent authority shall be responsible for monitoring and corrective measures pursuant to the requirements laid down in this Directive and for all obligations relating to the surrender of allowances in case of leakages pursuant to Directive 2003/87/EC and preventive and remedial action pursuant to Articles 5(1) and 6(1) of Directive 2004/35/EC. The post-closure requirements pursuant to this Directive shall be fulfilled by the competent authority on the basis of the provisional post-closure plan referred to in paragraph 3 of this Article, which shall be updated as necessary.
5.   The competent authority shall recover from the operator the costs incurred in relation to the measures referred to in paragraph 4, including by drawing on the financial security pursuant to Article 19.
