Article 4
Application and permit
1. Without prejudice to Article 11 of Directive 75/442/EEC or to Article 3 of Directive 91/689/EEC, no incineration or co-incineration plant shall operate without a permit to carry out these activities.
2. Without prejudice to Directive 96/61/EC, the application for a permit for an incineration or co-incineration plant to the competent authority shall include a description of the measures which are envisaged to guarantee that:
(a) the plant is designed, equipped and will be operated in such a manner that the requirements of this Directive are taking into account the categories of waste to be incinerated;
(b) the heat generated during the incineration and co-incineration process is recovered as far as practicable e.g. through combined heat and power, the generating of process steam or district heating;
(c) the residues will be minimised in their amount and harmfulness and recycled where appropriate;
(d) the disposal of the residues which cannot be prevented, reduced or recycled will be carried out in conformity with national and Community legislation.
3. The permit shall be granted only if the application shows that the proposed measurement techniques for emissions into the air comply with Annex III and, as regards water, comply with Annex III paragraphs 1 and 2.
4. The permit granted by the competent authority for an incineration or co-incineration plant shall, in addition to complying with any applicable requirement laid down in Directives 91/271/EEC, 96/61/EC, 96/62/EC, 76/464/EEC and 1999/31/EC:
(a) list explicitly the categories of waste which may be treated. The list shall use at least the categories of waste set up in the European Waste Catalogue (EWC), if possible, and contain information on the quantity of waste, where appropriate;
(b) include the total waste incinerating or co-incinerating capacity of the plant;
(c) specify the sampling and measurement procedures used to satisfy the obligations imposed for periodic measurements of each air and water pollutants.
5. The permit granted by the competent authority to an incineration or co-incineration plant using hazardous waste shall in addition to paragraph 4:
(a) list the quantities of the different categories of hazardous waste which may be treated;
(b) specify the minimum and maximum mass flows of those hazardous wastes, their lowest and maximum calorific values and their maximum contents of pollutants, e.g. PCB, PCP, chlorine, fluorine, sulphur, heavy metals.
6. Without prejudice to the provisions of the Treaty, Member States may list the categories of waste to be mentioned in the permit which can be co-incinerated in defined categories of co-incineration plants.
7. Without prejudice to Directive 96/61/EC, the competent authority shall periodically reconsider and, where necessary, update permit conditions.
8. Where the operator of an incineration or co-incineration plant for non-hazardous waste is envisaging a change of operation which would involve the incineration or co-incineration of hazardous waste, this shall be regarded as a substantial change within the meaning of Article 2(10)(b) of Directive 96/61/EC and Article 12(2) of that Directive shall apply.
9. If an incineration or co-incineration plant does not comply with the conditions of the permit, in particular with the emission limit values for air and water, the competent authority shall take action to enforce compliance.

