Article 18
Reimbursement and re-routing
1.   Where it is reasonably to be expected, either at departure or in the event of a missed connection or a cancellation, that arrival at the final destination under the transport contract will be subject to a delay of 60 minutes or more, the railway undertaking operating the delayed or cancelled service shall immediately offer the passenger the choice between one of the following options, and shall make the necessary arrangements:
(a)
reimbursement of the full cost of the ticket, under the conditions by which it was paid, for the part or parts of his or her journey not made and for the part or parts already made if the journey is no longer serving any purpose in relation to the passenger’s original travel plan, together with, when relevant, a return service to the first point of departure at the earliest opportunity;
(b)
continuation or re-routing, under comparable transport conditions, to the final destination at the earliest opportunity;
(c)
continuation or re-routing, under comparable transport conditions, to the final destination at a later date at the passenger’s convenience.
2.   Where, for the purposes of points (b) and (c) of paragraph 1, comparable re-routing is operated by the same railway undertaking or another undertaking is commissioned to perform the re-routing, this shall not generate additional costs to the passenger. This requirement also applies where the re-routing involves the use of transport of a higher service class and alternative modes of transport. Railway undertakings shall make reasonable efforts to avoid additional connections and to ensure that delay in the total travel time is as short as possible. Passengers shall not be downgraded to transport facilities of a lower class unless such facilities are the only re-routing means available.
3.   Without prejudice to paragraph 2, the railway undertaking may allow the passenger, at his or her request, to conclude contracts with other providers of transport services which enable the passenger to reach the final destination under comparable conditions, in which case the railway undertaking shall reimburse the passenger for the costs that he or she incurs.
Where the available re-routing options are not communicated to the passenger within 100 minutes from the scheduled departure time of the delayed or cancelled service or the missed connection, the passenger shall be entitled to conclude such a contract with other providers of public transport services by rail, coach or bus. The railway undertaking shall reimburse the passenger for the necessary, appropriate and reasonable costs that he or she incurs.
This paragraph shall not affect national laws, regulations or administrative provisions which grant more favourable re-routing conditions to passengers.
4.   Re-routing transport service providers shall provide persons with disabilities and persons with reduced mobility with a comparable level of assistance and accessibility when offering an alternative service. Re-routing transport service providers may provide persons with disabilities and persons with reduced mobility with alternative services which are appropriate to their needs and which differ from those offered to other passengers.
5.   The reimbursements referred to in point (a) of paragraph 1 and in paragraph 3 shall be paid within 30 days after the receipt of the request. Member States may require railway undertakings to accept such requests by particular means of communication, provided that the request does not create discriminatory effects. The reimbursement may take the form of vouchers and/or the provision of other services provided that the terms of those vouchers and/or services are sufficiently flexible, in particular regarding the validity period and destination, and that the passenger agrees to accept those vouchers and/or services. The reimbursement of the ticket price shall not be reduced by financial transaction costs such as fees, telephone costs or stamps.
6.   The Commission shall adopt an implementing act establishing a common form for reimbursement requests under this Regulation by 7 June 2023. That common form shall be established in a format which is accessible to persons with disabilities and persons with reduced mobility. That implementing act shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 38(2).
7.   Passengers shall have the right to submit their requests using the common form referred to in paragraph 6. Railway undertakings shall not reject a request for reimbursement solely on the grounds that the passenger has not used that form. If a request is not sufficiently precise, the railway undertaking shall ask the passenger to clarify the request and shall assist the passenger to do so.
