Article 6
Bicycles
1.   Subject to the limitations set out in paragraph 3, and where appropriate for a reasonable fee, passengers shall be entitled to take bicycles on board the train.
On trains for which a reservation is required, it shall be possible to make a reservation for the carriage of a bicycle.
Where a passenger has made a reservation for a bicycle and the carriage of that bicycle is refused without a duly justified reason, the passenger shall be entitled to re-routing or reimbursement in accordance with Article 18, compensation in accordance with Article 19 and assistance in accordance with Article 20(2).
2.   Where designated places for bicycles are available on board the train, passengers shall stow their bicycles in such places. Where such places are not available, passengers shall keep their bicycles under supervision, and shall make all reasonable efforts to ensure that their bicycles cause no harm or damage to other passengers, mobility equipment, luggage or rail operations.
3.   Railway undertakings may restrict the right of passengers to take bicycles on board the train for safety or operational reasons, in particular as a result of capacity limits applicable during peak hours, or where rolling stock does not permit it. Railway undertakings may also restrict the carriage of bicycles based on the weights and dimensions of the bicycles concerned. They shall publish their conditions for the transport of bicycles, including up-to-date information on the availability of capacity, by using the telematics applications referred to in Regulation (EU) No 454/2011 on their official websites.
4.   When initiating procurement procedures for new rolling stock, or when performing a major upgrade of existing rolling stock resulting in the need for a new vehicle authorisation for placing on the market pursuant to Article 21(12) of Directive (EU) 2016/797 of the European Parliament and of the Council (12), railway undertakings shall ensure that train compositions, in which that rolling stock is used, are equipped with an adequate number of places for bicycles. This subparagraph shall not apply in relation to restaurant cars, sleeping cars or couchette cars.
Railway undertakings shall determine an adequate number of places for bicycles taking into consideration the size of train composition, the type of service and the demand for transport of bicycles. The adequate number of places for bicycles shall be defined in plans referred to in paragraph 5. Where there are no such plans or the plans do not determine such a number, each train composition shall have at least four places for bicycles.
Member States may set a number higher than four as the minimum adequate number for certain types of services, in which case that number shall apply instead of the number identified in accordance with the second subparagraph.
5.   Railway undertakings may establish, and keep up-to-date, plans on how to increase and improve the transport of bicycles, and on other solutions encouraging combined use of railways and bicycles.
The competent authorities, as defined in point (b) of Article 2 of Regulation (EC) No 1370/2007 of the European Parliament and of the Council (13), may establish such plans for services provided under public service contracts. Member States may require that such plans are established by those competent authorities or by railway undertakings operating on their territory.
6.   The plans referred to in paragraph 5 shall be established following consultation of the public and relevant representative organisations. Those plans shall be published on the website of the railway undertaking or the competent authority, as appropriate.
