Article 8
Union response measures
1.   The Commission shall adopt Union response measures by means of implementing acts where all of the following conditions are met:
(a)
action pursuant to Articles 5 and 6 has not resulted, within a reasonable period, in the cessation of the economic coercion and, where requested pursuant to Article 5(10), in the reparation of the injury to the Union;
(b)
the adoption of Union response measures is necessary to protect the interests and rights of the Union and its Member States in the particular case, in light of the options available;
(c)
the adoption of Union response measures is in the Union interest, as determined in accordance with Article 9.
Where the economic coercion has ceased but the third country has not repaired in full the injury to the Union, despite having been requested to do so, the Commission shall base the assessment of whether the condition referred to in the first subparagraph, point (b), of this paragraph, is met on all the circumstances of the case. That assessment shall be based, in particular, on the nature and extent of the damage caused and the general obligation under customary international law to make full reparation for the injury caused by an internationally wrongful act.
The implementing acts referred to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 18(2).
2.   The Commission shall select appropriate Union response measures from those set out in Annex I. It shall determine which of those measures are appropriate on the basis of the criteria for selection and design set out in Article 11.
In the implementing act referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article, the Commission shall state the reasons why it considers that the conditions referred to in that paragraph are met and why it considers that the Union response measures are appropriate in light of the criteria referred to in Article 11.
3.   Union response measures shall be adopted as:
(a)
measures of general application; or
(b)
measures which apply to certain natural or legal persons which engage or might engage in activities falling under Article 207 TFEU and are connected or linked to the government of the third country.
Union response measures referred to in the first subparagraph, point (a), may be designed in such a way that they affect particular sectors, regions or operators of the third country in accordance with the rules of origin and nationality set out in Annex II.
4.   Insofar as the third-country measure constitutes an internationally wrongful act, Union response measures may consist of measures that amount to the non-performance of international obligations towards the third country.
5.   The Commission shall ensure coordination of the adoption of Union response measures with the measures it adopts pursuant to Union legal acts other than this Regulation for the purpose of responding to the economic coercion.
6.   The implementing act referred to in paragraph 1 shall provide for a deferred date of application which shall not be later than 3 months from the date of its adoption, unless, in light of specific circumstances, a later date of application is provided for.
The Commission shall set that date, taking into account the circumstances of the case, to allow for the notification of the third country pursuant to paragraph 7 and for the third country to cease the economic coercion and, where requested, repair the injury to the Union.
7.   Upon adoption of the implementing act referred to in paragraph 1, the Commission shall notify the third country thereof and:
(a)
call upon the third country to immediately cease the economic coercion and, where appropriate and where requested, to repair the injury to the Union;
(b)
offer to negotiate a solution with the third country; and
(c)
notify the third country that the Union response measures will apply, unless the economic coercion ceases and, where appropriate and where requested, the third country repairs the injury to the Union.
8.   Where the Commission has credible information that the economic coercion has ceased or that the third country has taken concrete steps to cease the economic coercion and, where appropriate, has repaired the injury to the Union before the deferred date of application set in accordance with paragraph 6, the implementing act referred to in paragraph 1 shall provide for a further deferral of the date of application. That deferral shall be for a period specified in that implementing act and shall be such as to allow the Commission to verify the actual cessation of the economic coercion.
In the event that the Commission has such credible information, it shall publish a notice in the Official Journal of the European Union indicating that it has such information and the date of application of the implementing act referred to in paragraph 1, as deferred in accordance with the first subparagraph of this paragraph.
9.   If the third country ceases the economic coercion and, where appropriate, repairs the injury to the Union before the date of application of the implementing act referred to in paragraph 1, the Commission shall adopt an implementing act repealing that implementing act.
That repealing implementing act shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 18(2).
10.   Notwithstanding paragraphs 7, 8 and 9, the implementing act referred to in paragraph 1 may provide that Union response measures apply without the Commission first calling, pursuant to paragraph 7, point (a), upon the third country concerned to cease the economic coercion or, where appropriate, repair the injury to the Union, or notifying, pursuant to paragraph 7, point (c), the third country concerned that Union response measures will apply where, in duly justified cases, that is necessary for the preservation of the rights and interests of the Union or a Member State, in particular of the effectiveness of Union response measures.
11.   Notwithstanding paragraphs 6 and 8, where the economic coercion consists of a threat to apply a third-country measure affecting trade or investment in accordance with Article 2(1), the implementing act referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article shall apply from the date on which that third-country measure is applied.
The Commission shall publish a notice in the Official Journal of the European Union indicating the date of application of the implementing act as referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article.
