Article 5
Determination with regard to the third-country measure
1.   Where, following an examination carried out in accordance with Article 4, the Commission concludes that the third-country measure meets the conditions of Article 2(1), it shall submit a proposal to the Council for an implementing act determining that the third-country measure meets the conditions of Article 2(1).
In that proposal, the Commission shall explain how those conditions are met.
The proposal shall set out an indicative period for the Commission to assess whether the conditions of Article 8(1) are met. That period shall not exceed 6 months, unless a duly justified longer period is necessary in light of the specific circumstances of the case.
2.   In the proposal referred to in paragraph 1 or in a subsequent proposal for a Council implementing act, the Commission shall, where appropriate, propose that the Council determine that the third country be requested to repair the injury to the Union.
The assessment of whether it is appropriate to request the third country to repair the injury to the Union shall be based on all circumstances of the case. That assessment shall be based, in particular, on the nature and extent of the damage caused and the general obligation under customary international law to make full reparation for the injury caused by an internationally wrongful act.
3.   Prior to submitting the proposal referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article, where useful for the purposes of the determination referred to in that paragraph, the Commission shall, without prejudice to any engagement with the third country concerned pursuant to Article 6, invite the third country to submit its observations within a specified period. Such period shall be reasonable and shall not unduly delay the submission of the proposal referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article.
4.   Prior to submitting the proposal referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article, the Commission shall inform the European Parliament of the conclusions of the examination carried out in accordance with Article 4.
5.   The Council shall adopt the implementing acts referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2, acting by qualified majority.
The Council may amend the proposals referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2, acting by qualified majority.
6.   For the purposes of this Article, the Council shall act expeditiously.
The Council shall act within 8 weeks of the submission of the proposals referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2.
By way of derogation from the second subparagraph, the Council may act after that eight-week period provided that it informs the Commission of a delay and of the reasons for that delay.
The total period for the Council to act shall normally not exceed 10 weeks from the submission of the proposals referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2.
In the exercise of its implementing powers, the Council shall apply Article 2(1), which sets out the conditions for the existence of economic coercion, and the criteria set out in paragraph 2, second subparagraph, of this Article, and shall explain how those conditions are met and criteria are applied.
7.   Implementing acts adopted pursuant to this Article shall be published in the Official Journal of the European Union.
8.   The European Parliament shall be informed of any implementing acts proposed or adopted pursuant to this Article.
9.   Where the Council adopts an implementing act as referred to in paragraph 1, the Commission shall inform the third country accordingly and request that third country to cease the economic coercion immediately.
10.   Where the Council adopts an implementing act as referred to in paragraph 2, the Commission shall request the third country to repair the injury to the Union within a reasonable period.
