Article 12
Amendment, suspension and termination of Union response measures
1.   The Commission shall keep under review the economic coercion, and the effectiveness of the Union response measures and their effects on the Union interest.
2.   Where the third country suspends the economic coercion, the Commission shall suspend the application of the Union response measures for the duration of the third country’s suspension.
Where the third country and the Union or the Member State concerned have concluded an agreement, including on the basis of an offer from that third country, to submit the matter to binding international third-party adjudication and that third country suspends its economic coercion, the Commission shall suspend the application of the Union response measures for the duration of the adjudication proceedings.
Where an adjudication decision or a settlement with the third country requires implementation by the third country, the Commission shall suspend the application of the Union response measures provided that the third country is engaged in the implementation of that adjudication decision or settlement.
The Commission shall suspend or resume the application of Union response measures where necessary in light of the Union interest determined pursuant to Article 9, or where necessary to facilitate continued engagement pursuant to Article 6(3) after the adoption of Union response measures.
The Commission shall suspend or resume the application of Union response measures by means of implementing acts. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 18(2).
3.   Where it is necessary to make adjustments to Union response measures taking into account Articles 2 and 11, or further developments, including the third country’s reaction, the Commission shall amend, as appropriate, Union response measures, by means of implementing acts.
Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 18(2).
4.   The Commission shall terminate Union response measures in any of the following circumstances:
(a)
the economic coercion has ceased and, where the Council has decided to request reparation of the injury to the Union pursuant to Article 5(10), the injury to the Union has been repaired;
(b)
the economic coercion has ceased, but the third country has not repaired the injury to the Union despite the Council having decided to request reparation of the injury to the Union pursuant to Article 5(10), unless maintaining the Union response measures is necessary to achieve the objective of this Regulation, taking into account all circumstances of the case;
(c)
a mutually agreed solution has been reached;
(d)
a binding decision in international third-party adjudication covering the matter of the economic coercion requires the termination of the Union response measure;
(e)
termination of the Union response measures is appropriate in light of the Union interest determined pursuant to Article 9.
The Commission shall terminate Union response measures by means of implementing acts. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 18(2).
5.   On duly justified imperative grounds of urgency, such as to avoid irreparable damage to the Union or a Member State or to continue to ensure consistency with the Union’s obligations under international law as a result of the suspension or cessation of the economic coercion, the Commission shall adopt immediately applicable implementing acts in order to suspend or amend Union response measures.
Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 18(3) and they shall remain in force for a period not exceeding 2 months.
