Article 13
Information gathering related to Union response measures
1.   The Commission shall, before the adoption or amendment of Union response measures, and may, before the suspension or termination of such measures, seek information and views regarding the economic impact on Union economic operators by means of publishing a notice in the Official Journal of the European Union and, where appropriate, through other suitable means of public communication.
The notice shall indicate the date by which the information and views are to be submitted to the Commission.
The Commission may start gathering the information and views as referred to in the first subparagraph at any time it deems appropriate.
2.   For the purposes of paragraph 1, the Commission shall inform and consult stakeholders, in particular associations acting on behalf of Union economic operators and trade unions, that could be affected by potential Union response measures, and Member States’ authorities involved in the preparation or implementation of legislation that regulates the sectors that could be affected by those measures.
3.   Without unduly delaying the adoption of Union response measures, the Commission shall identify possible options for potential Union response measures and seek information and views in particular on:
(a)
the impact of such measures on third-country actors and their competitors, business partners or clients within the Union, as well as users, final consumers or employees within the Union;
(b)
the interaction of such measures with relevant Member State legislation;
(c)
the administrative burden which could be caused by such measures.
4.   The Commission shall take utmost account of the information and views gathered pursuant to this Article.
When submitting a draft implementing act to the Committee in the context of the examination procedure referred to in Article 18(2), the Commission shall provide an analysis of the envisaged measures and their potential impact.
That analysis shall include a thorough assessment of impact on both upstream and downstream industries and final consumers within the Union and, if relevant, point out any potential disproportionate impact.
5.   For the purpose of adopting immediately applicable implementing acts in accordance with Article 12(5), the Commission shall seek information and views in a targeted manner from relevant stakeholders, unless the exceptional situation of imperative grounds of urgency is such that the gathering of information and views is not possible or not needed for objective reasons, such as to ensure compliance with international obligations of the Union.
