Article 29
Controls by the competent authority
1.   The competent authority may at any time take steps to verify, on board trains operating in its area of jurisdiction, that the train driver is in possession of the documents issued pursuant to this Directive.
2.   Notwithstanding verification as provided for in paragraph 1, in the event of negligence at the workplace the competent authority may verify if the driver in question complies with the requirements set out in Article 13.
3.   The competent authority may carry out enquiries regarding compliance with this Directive by drivers, railway undertakings, infrastructure managers, examiners and training centres pursuing their activities in its area of jurisdiction.
4.   If the competent authority finds that a driver no longer satisfies one or more required conditions, it shall take the following measures:
(a)
if it concerns a licence issued by the competent authority, the competent authority shall suspend the licence. The suspension shall be temporary or permanent depending on the scale of the problems created for rail safety. It shall immediately inform the driver concerned and his employer of its reasoned decision, without prejudice to the right of review provided for in Article 21. It shall indicate the procedure to be followed for recovering the licence;
(b)
if it concerns a licence issued by a competent authority in another Member State, the competent authority shall approach that authority and provide a reasoned request either that a further inspection be carried out or that the licence be suspended. The requesting competent authority shall inform the Commission and the other competent authorities of its request. The authority that issued the licence in question shall examine the request within four weeks and notify the other authority of its decision. The authority that issued the licence shall also inform the Commission and the other competent authorities of the decision. Any competent authority may prohibit train drivers from operating in its area of jurisdiction pending notification of the issuing authority’s decision;
(c)
if it concerns a certificate, the competent authority shall approach the issuing body and request either that a further inspection be carried out or that the certificate be suspended. The issuing body shall take appropriate measures and report back to the competent authority within a period of four weeks. The competent authority may prohibit train drivers from operating in its area of jurisdiction pending the report of the issuing body, and shall inform the Commission and the other competent authorities thereof.
At all events, if the competent authority considers that a particular driver creates a serious threat to the safety of the railways, it shall immediately take the necessary action, such as asking the infrastructure manager to stop the train and prohibiting the driver from operating in its area of jurisdiction for as long as necessary. It shall inform the Commission and the other competent authorities of any such decision.
In all cases the competent authority, or the body designated for this, shall update the register provided for in Article 22.
5.   If a competent authority considers that a decision taken by a competent authority in another Member State pursuant to paragraph 4 fails to comply with the relevant criteria, the matter shall be referred to the Commission which shall deliver its opinion within three months. If necessary, corrective measures shall be proposed to the Member State concerned. In the event of disagreement or dispute, the matter shall be referred to the Committee referred to in Article 32(1), and the Commission shall take whatever measures are necessary in accordance with the regulatory procedure referred to in Article 32(2). A Member State may maintain a prohibition on a driver driving on its territory in accordance with paragraph 4 until the matter is concluded in accordance with this paragraph.
