Article 22
Registers and exchange of information
1.   The competent authorities shall be required to:
(a)
keep a register of all licences issued, updated, renewed, amended, expired, suspended, withdrawn or reported lost, stolen or destroyed. This register shall contain the data prescribed in section 4 of Annex I for every licence, which shall be accessible using the national number allotted to each driver. It shall be regularly updated;
(b)
supply, upon reasoned request, information on the status of such licences to the competent authorities of the other Member States, the Agency or any employer of drivers.
2.   Each railway undertaking and infrastructure manager shall be required to:
(a)
keep a register, or ensure that a register is kept, of all certificates issued, updated, renewed, amended, expired, suspended, withdrawn or reported lost, stolen or destroyed. This register shall contain the data prescribed in section 4 of Annex I for every certificate, as well as data relating to the periodic checks provided for in Article 16. It shall be regularly updated;
(b)
cooperate with the competent authority of the Member State where they are domiciled in order to exchange information with the competent authority and give it access to data required;
(c)
supply information on the content of such certificates to the competent authorities of the other Member States upon their request, when this is required as a consequence of their transnational activities.
3.   Train drivers shall have access to the data concerning them which is stored in the registers of competent authorities and of railway undertakings, and shall be provided with a copy of that data on request.
4.   The competent authorities shall cooperate with the Agency in order to ensure the interoperability of the registers provided for in paragraphs 1 and 2.
To this end, by 4 December 2008, the Commission shall adopt, on the basis of a draft prepared by the Agency, the basic parameters of the registers to be set up, such as data to be recorded, their format and the data exchange protocol, access rights, the duration of data retention and the procedures to be followed in cases of bankruptcy. These measures, designed to amend non-essential elements of this Directive by supplementing it, shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 32(3).
5.   The competent authorities, infrastructure managers and railway undertakings shall ensure that the registers provided for in paragraphs 1 and 2 and the modes of operation of such registers comply with Directive 95/46/EC.
6.   The Agency shall ensure that the system set up in paragraph 2(a) and (b) complies with Regulation (EC) No 45/2001.
