Article 37
Gradual phasing-in and transition periods
This Directive shall be phased in gradually as indicated below.
1.
The registers provided for in Article 22 shall be set up within two years of the adoption of the basic parameters of the registers provided for in Article 22(4).
2.
(a)
Within two years of the adoption of the basic parameters of the registers provided for in Article 22(4), certificates or licences shall be issued in accordance with this Directive to drivers performing cross-border services, cabotage services or freight services in another Member State, or work in at least two Member States, without prejudice to the provisions of point 3.
From that same date, all train drivers performing the services listed above, including those not yet licensed or certified in accordance with this Directive, shall comply with the periodic checks provided for in Article 16.
(b)
Within two years of the setting-up of the registers provided for in point 1, all new licences and certificates shall be issued in accordance with this Directive, without prejudice to the provisions of point 3.
(c)
Within seven years of the setting-up of the registers provided for in point 1, all drivers shall hold licences and certificates in conformity with this Directive. The issuing bodies shall take into account all professional competencies already acquired by each driver in such a way that this requirement does not generate unnecessary administrative and financial burdens. Entitlements to drive previously granted to drivers shall be safeguarded, as far as possible. The issuing bodies may nevertheless decide, for individual drivers or for groups of drivers, as appropriate, that additional examinations and/or training are necessary in order to obtain licences and/or certificates under this Directive.
3.
Drivers authorised to drive in accordance with the provisions which applied prior to the application of point 2(a) or (b) may continue to pursue their professional activities on the basis of their entitlements, and without applying the provisions of this Directive, for up to seven years from the setting-up of the registers provided for in point 1.
In the case of apprentices who started an approved education and training programme or an approved training course prior to the application of point 2(a) or (b), Member States may certify these apprentices in accordance with existing national provisions.
For drivers and apprentices referred to in this point, the competent authority or authorities involved may, in exceptional cases, grant exemptions from the medical requirements laid down in Annex II. The validity of any licence issued with such exemption shall be limited to the territory of the Member States concerned.
4.
Competent authorities, railway undertakings and infrastructure managers shall ensure the gradual application of periodic checks corresponding to those provided for by Article 16 to drivers who do not hold licences and certificates in conformity with this Directive.
5.
Where a Member State so requests, the Commission shall ask the Agency, in consultation with that Member State, to carry out a cost/benefit analysis of the application of the provisions of this Directive to train drivers operating exclusively on the territory of that Member State. The cost/benefit analysis shall cover a period of 10 years. This cost/benefit analysis shall be submitted to the Commission within two years of the setting-up of the registers provided for in point 1.
If this cost/benefit analysis shows that the costs of applying the provisions of this Directive to such train drivers outweigh the benefits, the Commission shall, in accordance with the regulatory procedure referred to in Article 32(2), adopt a decision within six months following the submission of the results of this cost/benefit analysis. The decision may be that the provisions of point 2(b) and (c) of this Article do not have to be applied to such train drivers for a period of up to 10 years on the territory of the Member State concerned.
No later than 24 months prior to the expiry of this temporary exemption period, the Commission, taking into account relevant developments in the railway sector in the Member State concerned, may, in accordance with the regulatory procedure referred to in Article 32(2), request the Agency to carry out another cost/benefit analysis, to be submitted to the Commission no later than 12 months prior to the expiry of this temporary exemption period. The Commission shall take a decision in accordance with the procedure described in the second subparagraph of this point.
