Article 6
Obligations of importers
1.   Importers shall place only compliant toys on the Community market.
2.   Before placing a toy on the market, importers shall ensure that the appropriate conformity assessment procedure has been carried out by the manufacturer.
They shall ensure that the manufacturer has drawn up the technical documentation, that the toy bears the required conformity marking and is accompanied by the required documents, and that the manufacturer has complied with the requirements set out in Article 4(5) and (6).
Where an importer considers or has reason to believe that a toy is not in conformity with the requirements set out in Article 10 and Annex II, it shall not place the toy on the market until the toy has been brought into conformity. Furthermore, where the toy presents a risk, the importer shall inform the manufacturer and the market surveillance authorities to that effect.
3.   Importers shall indicate their name, registered trade name or registered trade mark and the address at which they can be contacted on the toy or, where that is not possible, on its packaging or in a document accompanying the toy.
4.   Importers shall ensure that the toy is accompanied by instructions and safety information in a language or languages easily understood by consumers, as determined by the Member State concerned.
5.   Importers shall ensure that, while a toy is under their responsibility, storage or transport conditions do not jeopardise its compliance with the requirements set out in Article 10 and Annex II.
6.   When deemed appropriate with regard to the risks presented by a toy, importers shall, to protect the health and safety of consumers, carry out sample testing of marketed toys, investigate, and, if necessary, keep a register of complaints, of non-conforming toys and toy recalls, and shall keep distributors informed of such monitoring.
7.   Importers who consider or have reason to believe that a toy which they have placed on the market is not in conformity with the relevant Community harmonisation legislation shall immediately take the corrective measures necessary to bring that toy into conformity, to withdraw it or recall it, if appropriate. Furthermore, where the toy presents a risk, importers shall immediately inform the competent national authorities of the Member States in which they made the toy available to that effect, giving details, in particular, of the non-compliance and of any corrective measures taken.
8.   Importers shall, for a period of 10 years after the toy has been placed on the market, keep a copy of the EC declaration of conformity at the disposal of the market surveillance authorities and ensure that the technical documentation can be made available to those authorities, upon request.
9.   Importers shall, further to a reasoned request from a competent national authority, provide that authority with all the information and documentation necessary to demonstrate the conformity of the toy in a language easily understood by that authority. They shall cooperate with that authority, at its request, on any action taken to eliminate the risks posed by toys which they have placed on the market.
