Article 7
Obligations of distributors
1.   When making a toy available on the market, distributors shall act with due care in relation to the applicable requirements.
2.   Before making a toy available on the market, distributors shall verify that the toy bears the required conformity marking, that it is accompanied by the required documents and by instructions and safety information in a language or languages easily understood by consumers in the Member State in which the toy is to be made available on the market, and that the manufacturer and the importer have complied with the requirements set out in Article 4(5) and (6) and Article 6(3).
Where a distributor considers or has reason to believe that a toy is not in conformity with the requirements set out in Article 10 and Annex II, it shall not make the toy available on the market until the toy has been brought into conformity. Furthermore, where the toy presents a risk, the distributor shall inform the manufacturer or the importer, as well as the market surveillance authorities, to that effect.
3.   Distributors shall ensure that, while a toy is under their responsibility, storage or transport conditions do not jeopardise its compliance with the requirements set out in Article 10 and Annex II.
4.   Distributors who consider or have reason to believe that a toy which they have made available on the market is not in conformity with the relevant Community harmonisation legislation shall make sure that the corrective measures necessary to bring that toy into conformity, to withdraw it or recall it, if appropriate, are taken. Furthermore, where the toy presents a risk, distributors shall immediately inform the competent national authorities of the Member States in which they made the toy available to that effect, giving details, in particular, of the non-compliance and of any corrective measures taken.
5.   Distributors shall, further to a reasoned request from a competent national authority, provide that authority with all the information and documentation necessary to demonstrate the conformity of the toy. They shall cooperate with that authority, at its request, as regards any action taken to eliminate the risks posed by toys which they have made available on the market.
