Article 20
EC-type examination
1.   An application for EC-type examination, performance of that examination and issue of the EC-type examination certificate shall be carried out in accordance with the procedures set out in Module B of Annex II to Decision No 768/2008/EC.
EC-type examination shall be carried out in the manner specified in the second indent of point 2 of that Module.
In addition to those provisions, the requirements laid down in paragraphs 2 to 5 of this Article shall apply.
2.   The application for an EC-type examination shall include a description of the toy and an indication of the place of manufacture, including the address.
3.   When a conformity assessment body notified under Article 22 (hereinafter referred to as a ‘notified body’) carries out the EC-type examination, it shall evaluate, if necessary together with the manufacturer, the analysis of the hazards that the toy may present carried out by the manufacturer in accordance with Article 18.
4.   The EC-type examination certificate shall include a reference to this Directive, a colour image, a clear description of the toy, including its dimensions, and a list of the tests performed, together with a reference to the relevant test report.
The EC-type examination certificate shall be reviewed whenever necessary, in particular in case of a change to the manufacturing process, the raw materials or the components of the toy, and, in any case, every five years.
The EC-type examination certificate shall be withdrawn if the toy fails to comply with the requirements set out in Article 10 and Annex II.
Member States shall ensure that their notified bodies do not grant an EC-type examination certificate for a toy in respect of which a certificate has been refused or withdrawn.
5.   The technical documentation and correspondence relating to the EC-type examination procedures shall be drawn up in an official language of the Member State in which the notified body is established or in a language acceptable to that body.
