Article 42
Procedure for dealing with toys presenting a risk at national level
1.   Where the market surveillance authorities of one Member State have taken action pursuant to Article 20 of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008, or where they have sufficient reason to believe that a toy covered by this Directive presents a risk to the health or safety of persons, they shall carry out an evaluation in relation to the toy concerned covering all the requirements laid down in this Directive. The relevant economic operators shall cooperate as necessary with the market surveillance authorities.
Where, in the course of that evaluation, the market surveillance authorities find that the toy does not comply with the requirements laid down in this Directive, they shall without delay require the relevant economic operator to take appropriate corrective action to bring the toy into compliance with those requirements, to withdraw the toy from the market, or to recall it within a reasonable period, commensurate with the nature of the risk, as they may prescribe.
The market surveillance authorities shall inform the relevant notified body accordingly.
Article 21 of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 shall apply to the measures referred in the second subparagraph of this paragraph.
2.   Where the market surveillance authorities consider that non-compliance is not restricted to their national territory, they shall inform the Commission and the other Member States of the results of the evaluation and of the actions which they have required the relevant economic operator to take.
3.   The relevant economic operator shall ensure that appropriate corrective action is taken in respect of toys which that operator has made available on the Community market.
4.   Where the relevant economic operator does not take adequate corrective action within the period referred to in the second subparagraph of paragraph 1, the market surveillance authorities shall take appropriate provisional measures to prohibit or restrict the toy being made available on their national market, to withdraw the toy from that market or to recall it.
They shall inform the Commission and the other Member States, without delay, of those measures.
5.   The information referred to in paragraph 4 shall include all available details, in particular the data necessary for the identification of the non-compliant toy, the origin of the toy, the nature of the alleged non-compliance and the risk involved, the nature and duration of the national measures taken and the arguments put forward by the relevant economic operator. In particular, the market surveillance authorities shall indicate whether the non-compliance is due to either:
(a)
failure of the toy to meet requirements relating to the health or safety of persons; or
(b)
shortcomings in the harmonised standards referred to in Article 13 conferring a presumption of conformity.
6.   Member States other than the Member State initiating the procedure shall without delay inform the Commission and the other Member States of any measures adopted and of any additional information at their disposal relating to the non-compliance of the toy concerned, and, in the event of disagreement with the notified national measure, of their objections.
7.   Where, within three months of receipt of the information referred to in paragraph 4, no objection has been raised by either a Member State or the Commission in respect of a provisional measure taken by a Member State, that measure shall be deemed to be justified.
8.   Member States shall ensure that appropriate restrictive measures are taken in respect of the toy concerned, such as withdrawal of the toy from their market, without delay.
