Article 5
Implementation and monitoring of projects on the Union list
1.   Project promoters shall draw up an implementation plan for projects on the Union list, including a timetable for each of the following:
(a)
feasibility and design studies including, as regards, climate adaptation and compliance with environmental legislation and with the doing ‘no significant harm’ principle;
(b)
approval by the national regulatory authority or by any other authority concerned;
(c)
construction and commissioning;
(d)
the permit granting process referred to in Article 10(6), point (b).
2.   TSOs, DSOs and other operators shall cooperate with each other in order to facilitate the development of projects on the Union list in their area.
3.   The Agency and the Groups concerned shall monitor the progress achieved in implementing the projects on the Union list and, where necessary, make recommendations to facilitate their implementation. The Groups may request additional information in accordance with paragraphs 4, 5 and 6, convene meetings with the relevant parties and invite the Commission to verify the information provided on site.
4.   By 31 December of each year following the year of the inclusion of a project on the Union list, project promoters shall submit an annual report, for each project falling under the energy infrastructure categories set out in Annex II, to the national competent authority referred to in Article 8(1).
That report shall include details of:
(a)
the progress achieved in the development, construction and commissioning of the project, in particular with regard to the permit granting process and the consultation procedure, as well as compliance with environmental legislation, with the principle that the project does ‘no significant harm’ to the environment, and climate adaptation measures taken;
(b)
where relevant, delays compared to the implementation plan, the reasons for such delays and other difficulties encountered;
(c)
where relevant, a revised plan aiming to overcome the delays.
5.   By 28 of February of each year following the year in which the project promoter has to submit the report referred to in paragraph 4 of this Article, the competent authorities referred to in Article 8(1) shall submit to the Agency and to the relevant Group the report referred to in paragraph 4 of this Article supplemented with information on the progress and, where relevant, on delays in the implementation of projects on the Union list located on their respective territory with regard to the permit granting processes, and on the reasons for such delays. The contribution of the competent authorities to the report shall be clearly marked as such and drafted without modifying the text introduced by the project promoters.
6.   By 30 April of each year in which a new Union list should be adopted, the Agency shall submit to the Groups a consolidated report for the projects on the Union list that are subject to the competence of national regulatory authorities, evaluating the progress achieved and expected changes in project costs, and, where appropriate, make recommendations on how to overcome the delays and difficulties encountered. That consolidated report shall also evaluate, in accordance with Article 11, point (b), of Regulation (EU) 2019/942, the consistent implementation of the Union-wide network development plans with regard to the energy infrastructure priority corridors and areas set out in Annex I.
In duly justified cases, the Agency may request additional information necessary for carrying out its tasks set out in this paragraph.
7.   Where the commissioning of a project on the Union list is delayed when compared to the implementation plan, other than for overriding reasons beyond the control of the project promoter, the following measures shall apply:
(a)
in so far as measures referred to in Article 22(7), point (a), (b) or (c) of Directive 2009/73/EC and Article 51(7), point (a), (b) or (c) of Directive (EU) 2019/944 are applicable in accordance with respective national law, national regulatory authorities shall ensure that the investment is carried out;
(b)
if the measures of national regulatory authorities pursuant to point (a) are not applicable, the project promoter shall, within 24 months of the date of commissioning set out in the implementation plan, choose a third party to finance or construct all or part of the project;
(c)
if a third party is not chosen in accordance with point (b), the Member State or, when the Member State has so provided, the national regulatory authority may, within two months of the expiry of the period referred to in point (b), designate a third party to finance or construct the project which the project promoter shall accept;
(d)
where the delay compared to the date of commissioning in the implementation plan exceeds 26 months, the Commission, subject to the agreement and with the full cooperation of the Member States concerned, may launch a call for proposals open to any third party capable of becoming a project promoter to build the project in accordance with an agreed timetable;
(e)
where measures referred to in point (c) or (d) are applied, the system operator in whose area the investment is located shall provide the implementing operators or investors or third party with all the information needed to realise the investment, shall connect new assets to the transmission network or, where applicable, the distribution network and shall generally make its best efforts to facilitate the implementation of the investment and the secure, reliable and efficient operation and maintenance of the project on the Union list.
8.   A project on the Union list may be removed from the Union list in accordance with the procedure set out in Article 3(4) if its inclusion in that list was based on incorrect information which was a determining factor for that inclusion, or the project does not comply with Union law.
9.   Projects which are no longer on the Union list shall lose all rights and obligations linked to the status of project of common interest or project of mutual interest provided for in this Regulation.
However, a project which is no longer on the Union list but for which an application file has been accepted for examination by the competent authority shall maintain the rights and obligations laid down in Chapter III, except where the project has been removed from the Union list for the reasons set out in paragraph 8 of this Article.
10.   This Article shall be without prejudice to any Union financial assistance granted to any project on the Union list prior to its removal from the Union list.
