Article 6
European coordinators
1.   Where a project of common interest encounters significant implementation difficulties, the Commission may designate, in agreement with the Member States concerned, a European coordinator for a period of up to one year, renewable twice.
2.   The European coordinator shall:
(a)
promote the projects, for which he or she has been designated as a European coordinator and the cross-border dialogue between the project promoters and all stakeholders concerned;
(b)
assist all parties as necessary in consulting the stakeholders concerned, discussing alternative routing, where appropriate, and obtaining necessary permits for the projects;
(c)
where appropriate, advise project promoters on the financing of the project;
(d)
ensure that appropriate support and strategic direction by the Member States concerned are provided for the preparation and implementation of the projects;
(e)
submit every year, and, where appropriate, upon completion of their mandate, a report to the Commission on the progress of the projects and on any difficulties and obstacles which are likely to significantly delay the commissioning date of the projects.
The Commission shall transmit the report of the European coordinator referred to in point (e) to the European Parliament and the Groups concerned.
3.   The European coordinator shall be chosen following an open, non-discriminatory and transparent process and on the basis of a candidate’s experience with regard to the specific tasks assigned to him or her for the projects concerned.
4.   The decision designating the European coordinator shall specify the terms of reference, detailing the duration of the mandate, the specific tasks and corresponding deadlines, and the methodology to be followed. The coordination effort shall be proportionate to the complexity and estimated costs of the projects.
5.   The Member States concerned shall fully cooperate with the European coordinator in the execution of the tasks referred to in paragraphs 2 and 4.
