Article 24
Derogation for interconnections for Cyprus and Malta
1.   In the case of Cyprus and Malta, which are not interconnected to the trans-European gas network, a derogation from Article 3, Article 4(1), points (a) and (b), Article 4(5), Article 16(4), point (a), and Annexes I, II and III shall apply, without prejudice to Article 32(2). One interconnection for each of those Member States shall maintain its status of project of common interest under this Regulation with all relevant rights and obligations, where that interconnection:
(a)
is under development or planning on 23 June 2022;
(b)
has been granted the status of project of common interest under Regulation (EU) No 347/2013; and
(c)
is necessary to secure permanent interconnection of those Member States to the trans-European gas network.
Those projects shall ensure the future ability to access new energy markets, including hydrogen.
2.   The project promoters shall provide sufficient evidence of how the interconnections referred to in paragraph 1 will allow access to new energy markets, including hydrogen, in line with the Union’s overall energy and climate policy objectives. Such evidence shall include an assessment of the supply and demand for renewable or low-carbon hydrogen as well as a calculation of the greenhouse gas emissions reduction enabled by the project.
The Commission shall regularly verify that assessment and that calculation, as well as the timely implementation of the project.
3.   In addition to the specific criteria set out in Article 19 for Union financial assistance, the interconnections referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article shall be designed in view of ensuring access to future energy markets, including hydrogen, shall not lead to a prolongation of the lifetime of natural gas assets and shall ensure the interoperability of neighbouring networks across borders. Any eligibility for Union financial assistance under Article 18 shall end on 31 December 2027.
4.   Any request for Union financial assistance for works shall clearly demonstrate the aim to convert the asset into a dedicated hydrogen asset by 2036 if market conditions allow, by means of a roadmap with a precise timeline.
5.   The derogation set out in paragraph 1 shall apply until Cyprus or Malta, respectively, is directly interconnected to the trans-European gas network or until 31 December 2029, whichever is the earlier.
