Article 3
Union list of projects of common interest and projects of mutual interest
1.   Regional groups (Groups) shall be established in accordance with the process set out in Section 1 of Annex III. The membership of each Group shall be based on each priority corridor and area and their respective geographical coverage as set out in Annex I. Decision-making power in the Groups shall be restricted to Member States and the Commission (decision-making body), and based on consensus.
2.   Each Group shall adopt its own rules of procedure, having regard to the provisions set out in Annex III.
3.   The decision-making body of each Group shall adopt a regional list of projects drawn up in accordance with the process set out in Section 2 of Annex III, the contribution of each project to implementing the energy infrastructure priority corridors and areas set out in Annex I and their fulfilment of the criteria set out in Article 4.
Where a Group draws up its regional list:
(a)
each individual proposal for a project shall require the approval of the Member States to whose territory the project relates; where a Member State does not give its approval, it shall present its substantiated reasons for doing so to the Group concerned;
(b)
it shall take into account the advice from the Commission with the aim of having a manageable total number of projects on the Union list.
4.   The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 20 of this Regulation in order to establish the Union list, subject to the second paragraph of Article 172 TFEU.
In exercising its power, the Commission shall ensure that the Union list is established every two years, on the basis of the regional lists adopted by the decision-making bodies of the Groups established pursuant to Section 1, point (1), of Annex III, following the procedure set out in paragraph 3 of this Article.
The Commission shall adopt the delegated act establishing the first Union list pursuant to this Regulation by 30 November 2023.
If a delegated act adopted by the Commission pursuant to this paragraph cannot enter into force due to an objection expressed either by the European Parliament or the Council pursuant to Article 20(6), the Commission shall immediately convene the Groups in order to draw up new regional lists taking into account the reasons for the objection. The Commission shall adopt a new delegated act establishing the Union list as soon as possible.
5.   When establishing the Union list by combining the regional lists referred to in paragraph 3, the Commission shall, taking due account of the deliberations of the Groups:
(a)
ensure that only projects that fulfil the criteria referred to in Article 4 are included;
(b)
ensure cross-regional consistency, taking into account the opinion of the Agency as referred to in Section 2, point (14), of Annex III;
(c)
take into account the opinions of Member States referred to in Section 2, point (10), of Annex III;
(d)
aim to ensure a manageable total number of projects on the Union list.
6.   Projects of common interest that fall under the energy infrastructure categories set out in point (1)(a), (b), (c), (d) and (f) of Annex II to this Regulation shall become an integral part of the relevant regional investment plans under Article 34 of Regulation (EU) 2019/943 and of the relevant national ten-year network development plans under Article 51 of Directive (EU) 2019/944 and other national infrastructure plans, as appropriate. Those projects of common interest shall be conferred the highest possible priority within each of those plans. This paragraph shall not apply to competing projects, projects that have not reached a sufficient degree of maturity to provide a project-specific cost-benefit analysis as referred to in Section 2, point (1)(d), of Annex III or projects of mutual interest.
7.   Projects of common interest that fall under the energy infrastructure categories set out in point (1)(a), (b), (c), (d) and (f) of Annex II and that are competing projects or projects that have not reached a sufficient degree of maturity to provide a project-specific cost-benefit analysis as referred to in Section 2, point (1)(d), of Annex III may be included in the relevant regional investment plans, the national ten-year network development plans and other national infrastructure plans, as appropriate, as projects under consideration.
