Article 12
Scenarios for the ten-year network development plans
1.   By 24 January 2023, the Agency, after having conducted an extensive consultation process involving the Commission, the Member States, the ENTSO for Electricity, the ENTSO for Gas, the EU DSO entity and at least the organisations representing associations involved in electricity, gas and hydrogen markets, heating and cooling, carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilisation stakeholders, independent aggregators, demand-response operators, organisations involved in energy efficiency solutions, energy consumer associations and civil society representatives, shall publish the framework guidelines for the joint scenarios to be developed by ENTSO for Electricity and ENTSO for Gas. Those guidelines shall be regularly updated as found necessary.
The guidelines shall establish criteria for a transparent, non-discriminatory and robust development of scenarios taking into account best practices in the field of infrastructures assessment and network development planning. The guidelines shall also aim to ensure that the underlying ENTSO for Electricity and ENTSO for Gas scenarios are fully in line with the energy efficiency first principle and with the Union’s 2030 targets for energy and climate and its 2050 climate neutrality objective and shall take into account the latest available Commission scenarios, as well as, when relevant, the national energy and climate plans.
The European Scientific Advisory Board on Climate Change may, on its own initiative, provide input on how to ensure compliance of scenarios with the Union’s 2030 targets for energy and climate and its 2050 climate neutrality objective. The Agency shall take duly into account that input in the framework guidelines referred in the first subparagraph.
The Agency shall provide reasons where it has not, or has only partly, taken into account the recommendations from Member States, stakeholders and the European Scientific Advisory Board on Climate Change.
2.   The ENTSO for Electricity and ENTSO for Gas shall follow the Agency’s framework guidelines when developing the joint scenarios to be used for the Union-wide ten-year network development plans.
The joint scenarios shall also include a long-term perspective until 2050 and include intermediary steps as appropriate.
3.   The ENTSO for Electricity and ENTSO for Gas shall invite the organisations representing all relevant stakeholders, including the EU DSO entity, associations involved in electricity, gas and hydrogen markets, heating and cooling, carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilisation stakeholders, independent aggregators, demand-response operators, organisations involved in energy efficiency solutions, energy consumer associations, civil society representatives, to participate in the scenarios development process, in particular on key elements such as assumptions and how they are reflected in the scenarios data.
4.   The ENTSO for Electricity and the ENTSO for Gas shall publish and submit the draft joint scenarios report to the Agency, the Member States and the Commission for their opinion.
The European Scientific Advisory Board on Climate Change may, on its own initiative, provide an opinion on the joint scenarios report.
5.   Within three months of receipt of the draft joint scenarios report together with the input received in the consultation process and a report on how it was taken into account, the Agency shall submit its opinion on compliance of the scenarios with the framework guidelines referred to in paragraph 1, first subparagraph, including possible recommendations for amendments, to the ENTSO for Electricity, ENTSO for gas, Member States and the Commission.
Within the same time limit, the European Scientific Advisory Board on Climate Change may, on its own initiative, provide an opinion on the compatibility of scenarios with the Union’s 2030 targets for energy and climate and its 2050 climate neutrality objective.
6.   Within three months of receipt of the opinion referred to in paragraph 5, the Commission taking into account the opinions of the Agency and Member States shall approve the draft joint scenarios report or request the ENTSO for Electricity and the ENTSO for Gas to amend it.
The ENTSO for Electricity and the ENTSO for Gas shall provide reasons explaining how any request for amendments from the Commission has been addressed.
In the event the Commission does not approve the joint scenarios report, it shall provide a reasoned opinion to the ENTSO for Electricity and the ENTSO for Gas.
7.   Within two weeks of the approval of the joint scenarios report in accordance with paragraph 6, the ENTSO for Electricity and the ENTSO for Gas shall publish it on their websites. They shall also publish the corresponding input and output data in a sufficiently clear and accurate form for a third party to reproduce the results, taking due account of the national law and relevant confidentiality agreements and sensitive information.
