Article 7
Priority status of projects on the Union list
1.   The adoption of the Union list shall establish, for the purposes of any decisions issued in the permit granting process, the necessity of projects on the Union list from an energy policy and climate perspective, without prejudice to the exact location, routing or technology of the project.
This paragraph shall not apply to competing projects or to projects that have not reached a sufficient degree of maturity to provide a project specific cost-benefit analysis as referred to in Section 2, point (1)(d), of Annex III.
2.   For the purpose of ensuring efficient administrative processing of the application files related to projects on the Union list, project promoters and all authorities concerned shall ensure that those files are treated in the most rapid way possible in accordance with Union and national law.
3.   Without prejudice to obligations provided for in Union law, projects on the Union list shall be granted the status of the highest national significance possible, where such a status exists in national law, and be appropriately treated in the permit granting processes and, if national law so provides, in spatial planning, including those processes relating to environmental assessments, in the manner such treatment is provided for in national law applicable to the corresponding type of energy infrastructure.
4.   All dispute resolution procedures, litigation, appeals and judicial remedies related to projects on the Union list in front of any national courts, tribunals, panels, including mediation or arbitration, where they exist in national law, shall be treated as urgent, if and to the extent to which national law provides for such urgency procedures.
5.   Member States shall assess, taking due account of the existing guidance issued by the Commission on streamlining the environmental assessment procedures for projects on the Union list, which legislative and non-legislative measures are necessary to streamline the environmental assessment procedures and to ensure their coherent application and shall inform the Commission of the result of that assessment.
6.   By 24 March 2023, Member States shall take the non-legislative measures that they have identified under paragraph 5.
7.   By 24 June 2023, Member States shall take the legislative measures that they have identified under paragraph 5. Those legislative measures shall be without prejudice to obligations provided for in Union law.
8.   With regard to the environmental impacts addressed in Article 6(4) of Directive 92/43/EEC and Article 4(7) of Directive 2000/60/EC, provided that all the conditions set out in those Directives are fulfilled, projects on the Union list shall be considered as being of public interest from an energy policy perspective, and may be considered as having an overriding public interest.
Where the opinion of the Commission is required in accordance with Directive 92/43/EEC, the Commission and the national competent authority referred to in Article 9 of this Regulation shall ensure that the decision with regard to the overriding public interest of a project is taken within the time limits set in Article 10(1) and (2) of this Regulation.
This paragraph shall not apply to competing projects or to projects that have not reached a sufficient degree of maturity to provide a project specific cost-benefit analysis as referred to in Section 2, point (1)(d), of Annex III.
