Article 13
Infrastructure Gaps Identification
1.   Within six months of approval of the joint scenarios report pursuant to Article 12(6) and every two years thereafter, the ENTSO for Electricity and the ENTSO for Gas shall publish the infrastructure gaps reports developed within the framework of the Union-wide ten-year network development plans.
When assessing the infrastructure gaps the ENTSO for Electricity and the ENTSO for Gas shall base their analysis on the scenarios established under Article 12, implement the energy efficiency first principle and consider with priority all relevant alternatives to new infrastructure. When considering new infrastructures solutions, the infrastructures gaps assessment shall take into account all relevant costs, including network reinforcements.
The infrastructures gaps assessment shall, in particular, focus on those infrastructure gaps potentially affecting the fulfilment of the Union’s 2030 climate and energy targets and its 2050 climate neutrality objective.
Prior to publishing their respective reports, the ENTSO for Electricity and the ENTSO for Gas shall conduct an extensive consultation process involving all relevant stakeholders, including the EU DSO entity, associations involved in electricity, gas and hydrogen markets, heating and cooling, carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilisation stakeholders, independent aggregators, demand-response operators, organisations involved in energy efficiency solutions and, energy consumer associations, civil society representatives, the Agency and all the Member States’ representatives that are part of the relevant energy infrastructure priority corridors that are set out in Annex I.
2.   The ENTSO for Electricity and the ENTSO for Gas shall submit their respective draft infrastructure gaps report to the Agency and the Commission and Member States for their opinion.
3.   Within three months of receipt of the infrastructure gaps report together with the input received in the consultation process and a report on how it was taken into account, the Agency shall submit its opinion to the ENTSO for Electricity or ENTSO for Gas, the Commission and Member States and make it publicly available.
4.   Within three months of receipt of the Agency’s opinion referred to in paragraph 3, the Commission shall, taking the Agency’s opinion into account and with input from the Member States, draft its opinion and submit it to the ENTSO for Electricity or the ENTSO for Gas.
5.   The ENTSO for Electricity and the ENTSO for Gas shall adapt their infrastructure gaps reports taking due account of the Agency’s opinion and in line with the Commission’s and the Member States’ opinions and make them publicly available.
