Article 11
Energy system wide cost-benefit analysis
1.   The ENTSO for Electricity and the ENTSO for Gas shall draft consistent single sector draft methodologies, including the energy network and market model referred to in paragraph 10 of this Article, for a harmonised energy system-wide cost-benefit analysis at Union level for projects on the Union list falling under the energy infrastructure categories set out in point (1)(a), (b), (d) and (f) and point (3) of Annex II.
The methodologies referred to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph shall be drawn up in line with the principles laid down in Annex V, be based on common assumptions allowing for project comparison, and be consistent with the Union’s 2030 targets for energy and climate and its 2050 climate neutrality objective, as well as with the rules and indicators set out in Annex IV.
The methodologies referred to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph shall be applied for the preparation of each subsequent Union-wide ten-year network development plans developed by the ENTSO for Electricity pursuant to Article 30 of Regulation (EU) 2019/943 or the ENTSO for Gas pursuant to Article 8 of Regulation (EC) No 715/2009.
By 24 April 2023, the ENTSO for Electricity and the ENTSO for Gas shall publish and submit to Member States, the Commission and the Agency their respective consistent single sector draft methodologies after having gathered input from the relevant stakeholders during the consultation process referred to in paragraph 2.
2.   Prior to submitting their respective draft methodologies to the Member States, the Commission and the Agency in accordance with paragraph 1, the ENTSO for Electricity and the ENTSO for Gas shall publish preliminary draft methodologies and conduct an extensive consultation process and seek recommendations from Member States and, at least, the organisations representing all relevant stakeholders, including the entity of distribution system operators in the Union established pursuant to Article 52 of Regulation (EU) 2019/943 (EU DSO entity), associations involved in electricity, gas and hydrogen markets, heating and cooling, carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilisation stakeholders, independent aggregators, demand-response operators, organisations involved in energy efficiency solutions, energy consumer associations, civil society representatives and, where it is deemed appropriate the national regulatory authorities and other national authorities.
Within three months of publication of the preliminary draft methodologies under the first subparagraph, any stakeholder referred to in that subparagraph may submit a recommendation.
The European Scientific Advisory Board on Climate Change established under Article 10a of Regulation (EC) No 401/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council (31) may, on its own initiative, submit an opinion to the draft methodologies.
Where applicable, Member States, and stakeholders referred to in the first subparagraph shall submit and make publicly available their recommendations and the European Scientific Advisory Board on Climate Change shall submit and make publicly available its opinion to the Agency and, as applicable, to the ENTSO for Electricity or the ENTSO for Gas.
The consultation process shall be open, timely and transparent. The ENTSO for Electricity and the ENTSO for Gas shall prepare and make public a report on the consultation process.
The ENTSO for Electricity and the ENTSO for Gas shall provide reasons where they have not, or have only partly, taken into account the recommendations from Member States or the stakeholders, as well as from national authorities, or the opinion of the European Scientific Advisory Board on Climate Change.
3.   Within three months of receipt of the draft methodologies together with the input received in the consultation process and the report on the consultation, the Agency shall provide an opinion to the ENTSO for Electricity and the ENTSO for Gas. The Agency shall notify its opinion to the ENTSO for Electricity, the ENTSO for Gas, the Member States, and the Commission and publish it on its website.
4.   Within three months of receipt of the draft methodologies, Member States may deliver their opinions to the ENTSO for Electricity and the ENTSO for Gas and the Commission. To facilitate the consultation, the Commission may organise specific meetings of the Groups to discuss the draft methodologies.
5.   Within three months of receipt of the opinions of the Agency and Member States, as referred to in paragraphs 3 and 4, the ENTSO for Electricity and the ENTSO for Gas shall amend their respective methodologies to fully take into account the opinions of the Agency and the Member States and submit them together with the opinion of the Agency to the Commission for its approval. The Commission shall issue its decision within three months of submission of the methodologies by the ENTSO for Electricity and the ENTSO for Gas, respectively.
6.   Within two weeks of the approval by the Commission in accordance with paragraph 5, the ENTSO for Electricity and the ENTSO for Gas shall publish their respective methodologies on their websites. They shall publish the corresponding input data and other relevant network, load flow and market data in a sufficiently accurate form subject to restrictions under national law and relevant confidentiality agreements. The Commission and the Agency shall ensure the confidential treatment of the data received by them and by any party that carries out analytical work on the basis of those data on their behalf.
7.   The methodologies shall be updated and improved regularly following the procedure described in paragraphs 1 to 6. In particular, they shall be amended after submission of the energy network and market model referred to in paragraph 10. The Agency, on its own initiative, or upon a duly reasoned request by national regulatory authorities or stakeholders, and after formally consulting the organisations representing all relevant stakeholders referred to in paragraph 2, first subparagraph, and the Commission, may request such updates and improvements, providing reasons and a timetable. The Agency shall publish the requests by national regulatory authorities or stakeholders and all relevant non-commercially sensitive documents leading to a request from the Agency for an update or improvement.
8.   For projects falling under the energy infrastructure categories set out in point (1)(c) and (e) and in points (2), (4) and (5) of Annex II, the Commission shall ensure the development of methodologies for a harmonised energy system-wide cost-benefit analysis at Union level. Those methodologies shall be compatible in terms of benefits and costs with the methodologies developed by the ENTSO for Electricity and the ENTSO for Gas. The Agency, with the support of national regulatory authorities, shall promote the consistency of those methodologies with the methodologies elaborated by ENTSO for Electricity and the ENTSO for Gas. The methodologies shall be developed in a transparent manner, including extensive consultation of Member States and of all relevant stakeholders.
9.   Every three years, the Agency shall establish and publish a set of indicators and corresponding reference values for the comparison of unit investment costs for comparable projects of the energy infrastructure categories included in Annex II. Project promoters shall provide the requested data to the national regulatory authorities and to the Agency.
The Agency shall publish the first indicators for the infrastructure categories set out in points (1), (2) and (3) of Annex II by 24 April 2023, to the extent that data is available to calculate robust indicators and reference values. Those reference values may be used by the ENTSO for Electricity and the ENTSO for Gas for the cost-benefit analyses carried out for subsequent Union-wide ten-year network development plans.
The Agency shall publish the first indicators for the energy infrastructure categories set out in points (4) and (5) of Annex II, by 24 April 2025.
10.   By 24 June 2025, following an extensive consultation process of stakeholders referred to in paragraph 2, first subparagraph, the ENTSO for Electricity and the ENTSO for Gas shall jointly submit to the Commission and the Agency a consistent and progressively integrated model that will provide consistency between single sector methodologies based on common assumptions including electricity, gas and hydrogen transmission infrastructure as well as storage facilities, liquefied natural gas and electrolysers, covering the energy infrastructure priority corridors and areas set out in Annex I drawn up in line with the principles laid down in Annex V.
11.   The model referred to in paragraph 10, shall cover at least the relevant sectors’ interlinkages at all stages of infrastructure planning, specifically scenarios, technologies and spatial resolution, infrastructure gaps identification in particular with respect to cross-border capacities, and projects assessment.
12.   After approval of the model referred to in paragraph 10 by the Commission in accordance with the procedure set out in paragraphs 1 to 5, it shall be included in the methodologies referred to in paragraph 1, that shall be amended accordingly.
13.   At least every five years, starting from its approval in accordance with paragraph 10, and more frequently where necessary, the model and the consistent single sector cost-benefit methodologies shall be updated in accordance with the procedure referred to in paragraph 7.
