Whereas:
(1) The potential for the exploitation of renewable energy sources is underused in the Community at present. The Community recognises the need to promote renewable energy sources as a priority measure given that their exploitation contributes to environmental protection and sustainable development. In addition this can also create local employment, have a positive impact on social cohesion, contribute to security of supply and make it possible to meet Kyoto targets more quickly. It is therefore necessary to ensure that this potential is better exploited within the framework of the internal electricity market.
(2) The promotion of electricity produced from renewable energy sources is a high Community priority as outlined in the White Paper on Renewable Energy Sources (hereinafter referred to as "the White Paper") for reasons of security and diversification of energy supply, of environmental protection and of social and economic cohesion. That was endorsed by the Council in its resolution of 8 June 1998 on renewable sources of energy(5), and by the European Parliament in its resolution on the White Paper.(6)
(3) The increased use of electricity produced from renewable energy sources constitutes an important part of the package of measures needed to comply with the Kyoto Protocol to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, and of any policy package to meet further commitments.
(4) The Council in its conclusions of 11 May 1999 and the European Parliament in its resolution of 17 June 1998 on electricity from renewable energy sources(7) have invited the Commission to submit a concrete proposal for a Community framework on access for electricity produced from renewable energy sources to the internal market. Furthermore, the European Parliament in its resolution of 30 March 2000 on electricity from renewable energy sources and the internal electricity market(8) underlined that binding and ambitious renewable energy targets at the national level are essential for obtaining results and achieving the Community targets.
(5) To ensure increased market penetration of electricity produced from renewable energy sources in the medium term, all Member States should be required to set national indicative targets for the consumption of electricity produced from renewable sources.
(6) These national indicative targets should be consistent with any national commitment made as part of the climate change commitments accepted by the Community under the Kyoto Protocol.
(7) The Commission should assess to what extent Member States have made progress towards achieving their national indicative targets, and to what extent the national indicative targets are consistent with the global indicative target of 12 % of gross domestic energy consumption by 2010, considering that the White Paper's indicative target of 12 % for the Community as a whole by 2010 provides useful guidance for increased efforts at Community level as well as in Member States, bearing in mind the need to reflect differing national circumstances. If necessary for the achievement of the targets, the Commission should submit proposals to the European Parliament and the Council which may include mandatory targets.
(8) Where they use waste as an energy source, Member States must comply with current Community legislation on waste management. The application of this Directive is without prejudice to the definitions set out in Annex 2a and 2b to Council Directive 75/442/EEC of 15 July 1975 on waste(9). Support for renewable energy sources should be consistent with other Community objectives, in particular respect for the waste treatment hierarchy. Therefore, the incineration of non-separated municipal waste should not be promoted under a future support system for renewable energy sources, if such promotion were to undermine the hierarchy.
(9) The definition of biomass used in this Directive does not prejudge the use of a different definition in national legislation, for purposes other than those set out in this Directive.
(10) This Directive does not require Member States to recognise the purchase of a guarantee of origin from other Member States or the corresponding purchase of electricity as a contribution to the fulfilment of a national quota obligation. However, to facilitate trade in electricity produced from renewable energy sources and to increase transparency for the consumer's choice between electricity produced from non-renewable and electricity produced from renewable energy sources, the guarantee of origin of such electricity is necessary. Schemes for the guarantee of origin do not by themselves imply a right to benefit from national support mechanisms established in different Member States. It is important that all forms of electricity produced from renewable energy sources are covered by such guarantees of origin.
(11) It is important to distinguish guarantees of origin clearly from exchangeable green certificates.
(12) The need for public support in favour of renewable energy sources is recognised in the Community guidelines for State aid for environmental protection(10), which, amongst other options, take account of the need to internalise external costs of electricity generation. However, the rules of the Treaty, and in particular Articles 87 and 88 thereof, will continue to apply to such public support.
(13) A legislative framework for the market in renewable energy sources needs to be established.
(14) Member States operate different mechanisms of support for renewable energy sources at the national level, including green certificates, investment aid, tax exemptions or reductions, tax refunds and direct price support schemes. One important means to achieve the aim of this Directive is to guarantee the proper functioning of these mechanisms, until a Community framework is put into operation, in order to maintain investor confidence.
(15) It is too early to decide on a Community-wide framework regarding support schemes, in view of the limited experience with national schemes and the current relatively low share of price supported electricity produced from renewable energy sources in the Community.
(16) It is, however necessary to adapt, after a sufficient transitional period, support schemes to the developing internal electricity market. It is therefore appropriate that the Commission monitor the situation and present a report on experience gained with the application of national schemes. If necessary, the Commission should, in the light of the conclusions of this report, make a proposal for a Community framework with regard to support schemes for electricity produced from renewable energy sources. That proposal should contribute to the achievement of the national indicative targets, be compatible with the principles of the internal electricity market and take into account the characteristics of the different sources of renewable energy, together with the different technologies and geographical differences. It should also promote the use of renewable energy sources in an effective way, and be simple and at the same time as efficient as possible, particularly in terms of cost, and include sufficient transitional periods of at least seven years, maintain investors' confidence and avoid stranded costs. This framework would enable electricity from renewable energy sources to compete with electricity produced from non-renewable energy sources and limit the cost to the consumer, while, in the medium term, reduce the need for public support.
(17) Increased market penetration of electricity produced from renewable energy sources will allow for economies of scale, thereby reducing costs.
(18) It is important to utilise the strength of the market forces and the internal market and make electricity produced from renewable energy sources competitive and attractive to European citizens.
(19) When favouring the development of a market for renewable energy sources, it is necessary to take into account the positive impact on regional and local development opportunities, export prospects, social cohesion and employment opportunities, especially as concerns small and medium-sized undertakings as well as independent power producers.
(20) The specific structure of the renewable energy sources sector should be taken into account, especially when reviewing the administrative procedures for obtaining permission to construct plants producing electricity from renewable energy sources.
(21) In certain circumstances it is not possible to ensure fully transmission and distribution of electricity produced from renewable energy sources without affecting the reliability and safety of the grid system and guarantees in this context may therefore include financial compensation.
(22) The costs of connecting new producers of electricity from renewable energy sources should be objective, transparent and non-discriminatory and due account should be taken of the benefit embedded generators bring to the grid.
(23) Since the general objectives of the proposed action cannot be sufficiently achieved by the Member States and can therefore, by reason of the scale or effects of the action, be better achieved at Community level, the Community may adopt measures, in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity as set out in Article 5 of the Treaty. Their detailed implementation should, however, be left to the Member States, thus allowing each Member State to choose the regime which corresponds best to its particular situation. In accordance with the principle of proportionality, as set out in that Article, this Directive does not go beyond what is necessary in order to achieve those objectives,
HAVE ADOPTED THIS DIRECTIVE:

