Article 8
Obligations of manufacturers
1.   When placing their measuring instruments on the market and/or putting them into use, manufacturers shall ensure that they have been designed and manufactured in accordance with the essential requirements set out in Annex I and in the relevant instrument-specific Annexes.
2.   Manufacturers shall draw up the technical documentation referred to in Article 18 and carry out the relevant conformity assessment procedure referred to in Article 17 or have it carried out.
Where compliance of a measuring instrument with the applicable requirements of this Directive has been demonstrated by that conformity assessment procedure, manufacturers shall draw up an EU declaration of conformity and affix the CE marking and the supplementary metrology marking.
3.   Manufacturers shall keep the technical documentation and the EU declaration of conformity for 10 years after the measuring instrument has been placed on the market.
4.   Manufacturers shall ensure that procedures are in place for series production to remain in conformity with this Directive. Changes in measuring instrument design or characteristics and changes in the harmonised standards, normative documents or in other technical specifications by reference to which conformity of a measuring instrument is declared shall be adequately taken into account.
When deemed appropriate with regard to the performance of a measuring instrument, manufacturers shall carry out sample testing of measuring instruments made available on the market, investigate and, if necessary, keep a register of complaints, of non-conforming measuring instruments and measuring instrument recalls, and shall keep distributors informed of any such monitoring.
5.   Manufacturers shall ensure that measuring instruments which they have placed on the market bear a type, batch or serial number or other element allowing their identification, or, where the size or nature of the measuring instrument does not allow it, that the required information is provided in a document accompanying the measuring instrument and on the packaging, if any, in accordance with point 9.2 of Annex I.
6.   Manufacturers shall indicate on the measuring instrument their name, registered trade name or registered trade mark and the postal address at which they can be contacted or, where that is not possible, in a document accompanying the measuring instrument and on the packaging, if any, in accordance with point 9.2 of Annex I. The address shall indicate a single point at which the manufacturer can be contacted. The contact details shall be in a language easily understood by end-users and market surveillance authorities.
7.   Manufacturers shall ensure that the measuring instrument which they have placed on the market is accompanied by a copy of the EU Declaration of conformity and by instructions and information in accordance with point 9.3 of Annex I, in a language which can be easily understood by end-users, as determined by the Member State concerned. Such instructions and information, as well as any labelling, shall be clear, understandable and intelligible.
8.   Manufacturers who consider or have reason to believe that a measuring instrument which they have placed on the market is not in conformity with this Directive shall immediately take the corrective measures necessary to bring that measuring instrument into conformity, to withdraw it or recall it, if appropriate. Furthermore, where the measuring instrument presents a risk, manufacturers shall immediately inform the competent national authorities of the Member States in which they made the measuring instrument available on the market to that effect, giving details, in particular, of the non-compliance and of any corrective measures taken.
9.   Manufacturers shall, further to a reasoned request from a competent national authority, provide it with all the information and documentation in paper or electronic form necessary to demonstrate the conformity of the measuring instrument with this Directive, in a language which can be easily understood by that authority. They shall cooperate with that authority, at its request, on any action taken to eliminate the risks posed by measuring instruments which they have placed on the market.
