Article 10
Obligations of importers
1.   Importers shall place only compliant measuring instruments on the market.
2.   Before placing a measuring instrument on the market and/or putting a measuring instrument into use importers shall ensure that the appropriate conformity assessment procedure referred to in Article 17 has been carried out by the manufacturer. They shall ensure that the manufacturer has drawn up the technical documentation, that the measuring instrument bears the CE marking and the supplementary metrology marking and is accompanied by a copy of the EU declaration of conformity and the required documents, and that the manufacturer has complied with the requirements set out in Article 8(5) and (6).
Where an importer considers or has reason to believe that a measuring instrument is not in conformity with the essential requirements set out in Annex I and in the relevant instrument-specific Annexes, he shall not place the measuring instrument on the market or put it into use until it has been brought into conformity. Furthermore, where the measuring instrument presents a risk, the importer shall inform the manufacturer and the market surveillance authorities to that effect.
3.   Importers shall indicate on the measuring instrument their name, registered trade name or registered trade mark and the postal address at which they can be contacted or, where that is not possible, in a document accompanying the measuring instrument and on its packaging, if any, in accordance with point 9.2 of Annex I. The contact details shall be in a language easily understood by end-users and market surveillance authorities.
4.   Importers shall ensure that the measuring instrument is accompanied by instructions and information in accordance with point 9.3 of Annex I, in a language which can be easily understood by end-users, as determined by the Member State concerned.
5.   Importers shall ensure that, while a measuring instrument is under their responsibility, its storage or transport conditions do not jeopardise its compliance with the essential requirements set out in Annex I and in the relevant instrument-specific Annexes.
6.   When deemed appropriate with regard to the performance of a measuring instrument, importers shall carry out sample testing of measuring instruments made available on the market, investigate, and, if necessary, keep a register of complaints, of non-conforming measuring instruments and measuring instrument recalls, and shall keep distributors informed of any such monitoring.
7.   Importers who consider or have reason to believe that a measuring instrument which they have placed on the market is not in conformity with this Directive shall immediately take the corrective measures necessary to bring that measuring instrument into conformity, to withdraw it or recall it, if appropriate. Furthermore, where the measuring instrument presents a risk, importers shall immediately inform the competent national authorities of the Member States in which they made the measuring instrument available on the market to that effect, giving details, in particular, of the non-compliance and of any corrective measures taken.
8.   Importers shall, for 10 years after the measuring instrument has been placed on the market keep a copy of the EU declaration of conformity at the disposal of the market surveillance authorities and ensure that the technical documentation can be made available to those authorities, upon request.
9.   Importers shall, further to a reasoned request from a competent national authority, provide it with all the information and documentation in paper or electronic form necessary to demonstrate the conformity of a measuring instrument in a language which can be easily understood by that authority. They shall cooperate with that authority, at its request, on any action taken to eliminate the risks posed by measuring instruments which they have placed on the market.
