Article 18
Technical documentation
1.   The technical documentation shall render the design, manufacture and operation of the measuring instrument intelligible and shall permit an assessment of its conformity with the applicable requirements of this Directive.
2.   The technical documentation shall be sufficiently detailed to ensure compliance with the following requirements:
(a)
the definition of the metrological characteristics;
(b)
the reproducibility of the metrological performances of produced measuring instruments when properly adjusted using appropriate intended means;
(c)
the integrity of the measuring instrument.
3.   The technical documentation shall insofar as relevant for assessment and identification of the type and/or the measuring instrument include the following information:
(a)
a general description of the measuring instrument;
(b)
conceptual design and manufacturing drawings and plans of components, sub-assemblies, circuits, etc.;
(c)
manufacturing procedures to ensure consistent production;
(d)
if applicable, a description of the electronic devices with drawings, diagrams, flow diagrams of the logic and general software information explaining their characteristics and operation;
(e)
descriptions and explanations necessary for the understanding of the information referred to in points (b), (c) and (d), including the operation of the measuring instrument;
(f)
a list of the harmonised standards and/or normative documents referred to in Article 14, applied in full or in part, the references of which have been published in the Official Journal of the European Union;
(g)
descriptions of the solutions adopted to meet the essential requirements where the harmonised standards and/or normative documents referred to in Article 14 have not been applied, including a list of other relevant technical specifications applied;
(h)
results of design calculations, examinations, etc.;
(i)
the appropriate test results, where necessary, to demonstrate that the type and/or the measuring instruments comply with the following:
—
the requirements of this Directive under declared rated operating conditions and under specified environmental disturbances,
—
the durability specifications for gas-, water-, thermal energy-meters as well as for liquids other than water;
(j)
the EU-type examination certificates or EU design examination certificates in respect of measuring instruments containing parts identical to those in the design.
4.   The manufacturer shall specify where seals and markings have been applied.
5.   The manufacturer shall indicate the conditions for compatibility with interfaces and sub-assemblies, where relevant.
