Article 16
Obligations of distributors of partly completed machinery
1.   When making partly completed machinery available on the market, distributors shall act with due care in relation to the requirements of this Regulation.
2.   Before making partly completed machinery available on the market, distributors shall verify that:
(a)
the partly completed machinery is accompanied by the EU declaration of incorporation referred to in Article 11(8);
(b)
the partly completed machinery is accompanied by the assembly instructions referred to in Article 11(7), and that they are in a language which can be easily understood by the person who incorporates the partly completed machinery as determined by the Member State in which the partly completed machinery is to be made available on the market;
(c)
the manufacturer and the importer have complied with the requirements referred to in Article 11(5) and (6) and Article 14(3) respectively.
3.   Where a distributor considers or has reason to believe that partly completed machinery is not in conformity with this Regulation, the distributor shall not make the partly completed machinery available on the market until it has been brought into conformity. Furthermore, where the partly completed machinery presents a risk as regards relevant essential health and safety requirements, the distributor shall inform the manufacturer or the importer as well as the market surveillance authorities to that effect.
4.   Distributors shall ensure that, while a partly completed machinery is under their responsibility, the storage or transport conditions do not jeopardise conformity with the relevant essential health and safety requirements set out in Annex III.
5.   Distributors who consider or have reason to believe that partly completed machinery which they have made available on the market is not in conformity with this Regulation shall make sure that the corrective actions necessary to bring that partly completed machinery into conformity, to withdraw it or recall it, as appropriate, are taken. Furthermore, where the partly completed machinery presents a risk as regards the relevant essential health and safety requirements distributors shall immediately inform the competent national authorities of the Member States in which they have made the partly completed machinery available on the market to that effect, giving details, in particular, of the non-conformity and of any corrective actions taken.
6.   Distributors shall, further to a reasoned request from a competent national authority, provide that authority with all the information and documentation, in paper or digital format, necessary to demonstrate the conformity of the partly completed machinery with this Regulation. They shall cooperate with that authority, at its request, on any action taken to eliminate the risks as regards the essential health and safety requirements presented by partly completed machinery which they have made available on the market.
