Article 11
Obligations of manufacturers of partly completed machinery
1.   When placing partly completed machinery on the market, manufacturers shall ensure that it has been designed and constructed in accordance with the relevant essential health and safety requirements set out in Annex III.
2.   Before placing partly completed machinery on the market, manufacturers shall draw up the technical documentation set out in Annex IV, Part B.
Where compliance of partly completed machinery with the relevant essential health and safety requirements set out in Annex III has been demonstrated in the technical documentation set out in Annex IV, Part B, manufacturers shall draw up the EU declaration of incorporation in accordance with Article 22.
3.   Manufacturers shall keep the technical documentation and the EU declaration of incorporation at the disposal of the market surveillance authorities for at least 10 years after the partly completed machinery has been placed on the market. Where relevant, the source code or the programming logic included in the technical documentation shall, upon a reasoned request, be made available to the competent national authorities, if that source code or programming logic is necessary in order for them to be able to check compliance with the relevant essential health and safety requirements set out in Annex III.
4.   Manufacturers shall ensure that procedures are in place for partly completed machinery that is part of a series production to remain in conformity with this Regulation. Adequate account shall be taken of changes in the production process, or in the design or characteristics of the partly completed machinery, and changes in the harmonised standards or other technical specifications, or in the common specifications referred to in Article 20, by reference to which the conformity of the partly completed machinery is declared or verified.
5.   Manufacturers shall ensure that the partly completed machinery which they place on the market bears at least the designation of the partly completed machinery, the year of construction, namely the year in which the manufacturing process was completed, model and series or type and any batch or serial number or other element allowing its identification that exists, or, where the size or nature of the partly completed machinery does not allow this, that the required information is provided on the packaging or in a document accompanying the partly completed machinery.
6.   Manufacturers shall indicate their name, registered trade name or registered trade mark, and the postal address and website, email address or other digital contact at which they can be contacted, on the partly completed machinery or, where that is not possible, on its packaging or in a document accompanying the partly completed machinery. The address shall indicate a single point at which the manufacturer can be contacted. The contact details shall be in a language easily understood by the person who incorporates the partly completed machinery into machinery and by market surveillance authorities.
7.   Manufacturers shall ensure that the partly completed machinery is accompanied by the assembly instructions set out in Annex XI.
The assembly instructions may be provided by the manufacturer in digital format.
When the assembly instructions are provided in digital format, the manufacturer shall:
(a)
mark on the partly completed machinery, or, where that is not possible, on its packaging or in an accompanying document, how to access the digital assembly instructions;
(b)
present them in a format that makes it possible for the person who incorporates the partly completed machinery to print and download the assembly instructions and save them on an electronic device so that he or she can access them at all times, in particular during a breakdown of the partly completed machinery; this requirement also applies where the assembly instructions are embedded in the software of the partly completed machinery;
(c)
make them accessible online for at least 10 years after the placing on the market of the partly completed machinery.
However, at the request of the person who incorporates the partly completed machinery at the time of purchase, the manufacturer shall provide the assembly instructions in paper format free of charge within one month.
The assembly instructions shall be in a language which can be easily understood by the person who incorporates the partly completed machinery, as determined by the Member State concerned, and shall be clear, understandable, and legible.
8.   Manufacturers shall ensure that the partly completed machinery is accompanied by the EU declaration of incorporation set out in Annex V, Part B or, alternatively, manufacturers shall provide the internet address or machine readable code where that EU declaration of incorporation can be accessed in the assembly instructions set out in Annex XI.
Digital EU declarations of incorporation shall be made accessible online for at least 10 years after the placing on the market of the partly completed machinery.
9.   Manufacturers who consider or have reason to believe that partly completed machinery which they have placed on the market is not in conformity with this Regulation shall immediately take the corrective actions necessary to bring that partly completed machinery into conformity, to withdraw it or to recall it, as appropriate. Furthermore, where the partly completed machinery presents a risk as regards the relevant essential health and safety requirements, manufacturers shall immediately inform the competent national authorities of the Member States in which they made the partly completed machinery available on the market to that effect, giving details, in particular, of the non-conformity and of any corrective actions taken.
10.   Manufacturers shall, further to a reasoned request from a competent national authority, provide that authority with all the information and documentation, in paper or digital format, necessary to demonstrate the conformity of the partly completed machinery with this Regulation, in a language which can be easily understood by that authority. They shall cooperate with that authority, at its request, on any actions taken to eliminate the risks as regards the relevant essential health and safety requirements presented by the partly completed machinery, which they have placed on the market.
