Article 10
Obligations of manufacturers of machinery and related products
1.   When placing machinery or a related product on the market or putting it into service, manufacturers shall ensure that it has been designed and constructed in accordance with the essential health and safety requirements set out in Annex III.
2.   Before placing machinery or a related product on the market or putting it into service, manufacturers shall draw up the technical documentation set out in Annex IV, Part A and carry out the relevant conformity assessment procedure referred to in Article 25 or have it carried out.
Where compliance of machinery or a related product with the essential health and safety requirements laid down in Annex III has been demonstrated by that conformity assessment procedure, manufacturers shall draw up the EU declaration of conformity in accordance with Article 21 and affix the CE marking in accordance with Article 24.
3.   Manufacturers shall keep the technical documentation and the EU declaration of conformity at the disposal of the market surveillance authorities for at least 10 years after the machinery or the related product has been placed on the market or put into service. Where relevant, the source code or the programming logic included in the technical documentation shall, upon a reasoned request, be made available to the competent national authorities, if that source code or programming logic is necessary in order for them to be able to check compliance with the essential health and safety requirements set out in Annex III.
4.   Manufacturers shall ensure that procedures are in place in order that machinery or related products that are part of a series production remain in conformity with this Regulation. Adequate account shall be taken of changes in the production process or in the design or characteristics of the machinery or related product, and changes in the harmonised standards, in other technical specifications, or in the common specifications referred to in Article 20 by reference to which the conformity of the machinery or related product is declared.
When deemed appropriate with regard to the risks presented by machinery or related products, manufacturers shall, in order to protect the health and safety of users, carry out sample testing of machinery or related products made available on the market and investigate their results. If necessary, manufacturers shall keep a register of complaints, of non-conforming machinery or related products and machinery or related product recalls, and shall keep distributors informed of any such monitoring.
5.   Manufacturers shall ensure that the machinery or related product which they place on the market or put into service bears at least a designation of the machinery or related product model, series or type, the year of construction, namely the year in which the manufacturing process was completed, and any batch or serial number or other element allowing its identification that exists, or, where the size or nature of the machinery or related product does not allow this, that the required information is provided on the packaging or in a document accompanying the machinery or related product.
6.   Manufacturers shall indicate their name, registered trade name or registered trade mark, and the postal address and website, e-mail address or other digital contact at which they can be contacted, on the machinery or related product or, where that is not possible, on its packaging or in a document accompanying the machinery or related product. The address shall indicate a single point at which the manufacturer can be contacted. The contact details shall be in a language easily understood by users and market surveillance authorities.
7.   Manufacturers shall ensure that the machinery or related products are accompanied by the instructions for use and the information set out in Annex III. The instructions may be provided in a digital format. Such instructions and information shall clearly describe the product model to which they correspond.
When the instructions for use are provided in digital format, the manufacturer shall:
(a)
mark on the machinery or related product, or, where that is not possible, on its packaging or in an accompanying document, how to access the digital instructions;
(b)
present them in a format that makes it possible for the user to print and download the instructions for use and save them on an electronic device so that he or she can access them at all times, in particular during a breakdown of the machinery or related product; this requirement also applies where the instructions for use are embedded in the software of the machinery or related product;
(c)
make them accessible online during the expected lifetime of the machinery or related product and for at least 10 years after the placing on the market of the machinery or related product.
However, at the request of the user at the time of the purchase, the manufacturer shall provide the instructions for use in paper format free of charge within one month.
In the case of machinery or a related product intended for non-professional users or that can, under reasonably foreseeable conditions, be used by non-professional users, even if not intended for them, the manufacturer shall provide, in paper format, the safety information that is essential for putting the machinery or related product into service and for using it in a safe way.
The instructions for use, the safety information and the information set out in Annex III shall be in a language which can be easily understood by users, as determined by the Member State concerned, and shall be clear, understandable and legible.
8.   Manufacturers shall ensure that the machinery or related product is accompanied by the EU declaration of conformity set out in Annex V, Part A or, alternatively, manufacturers shall provide the internet address or machine-readable code where that EU declaration of conformity can be accessed in the instructions for use and the information set out in Annex III.
Digital EU declarations of conformity shall be made accessible online for the expected lifetime of the machinery or related product and in any event for at least 10 years after the placing on the market or the putting into service of the machinery or related product.
9.   Manufacturers who consider or have reason to believe that machinery or a related product, which they have placed on the market or put into service is not in conformity with this Regulation shall immediately take the corrective actions necessary to bring that machinery or related product into conformity, to withdraw it or to recall it, as appropriate. Furthermore, where the machinery or related product presents a risk to the health or safety of persons, and, where appropriate, domestic animals or to property, and, where applicable, to the environment, manufacturers shall immediately inform the competent national authorities of the Member States in which they made the machinery or related product available on the market, or in which they put it into service, to that effect, giving details, in particular, of the non-conformity and of any corrective actions taken.
10.   Manufacturers shall, further to a reasoned request from a competent national authority, provide that authority with all the information and documentation, in paper or digital format, necessary to demonstrate the conformity of the machinery or related products with this Regulation, in a language which can be easily understood by that authority. They shall cooperate with that authority, at its request, on any actions taken to eliminate the risks presented by the machinery or related products, which they have placed on the market or put into service.
