Article 20
Presumption of conformity of products within the scope of this Regulation
1.   A product within the scope of this Regulation which is in conformity with harmonised standards or parts thereof the references of which have been published in the Official Journal of the European Union shall be presumed to be in conformity with the essential health and safety requirements set out in Annex III covered by those standards or parts thereof.
2.   The Commission shall, as provided in Article 10(1) of Regulation (EU) No 1025/2012, request one or more European standardisation organisations to draft harmonised standards for the essential health and safety requirements set out in Annex III.
3.   The Commission may adopt implementing acts establishing common specifications covering technical requirements that provide a means to comply with the essential health and safety requirements set out in Annex III for products within the scope of this Regulation.
Those implementing acts shall only be adopted where the following conditions are fulfilled:
(a)
the Commission has requested, pursuant to Article 10(1) of Regulation (EU) No 1025/2012, one or more European standardisation organisations to draft a harmonised standard for the essential health and safety requirements set out in Annex III and:
(i)
the request has not been accepted; or
(ii)
the harmonised standards addressing that request are not delivered within the deadline set in accordance with Article 10(1) of Regulation (EU) No 1025/2012; or
(iii)
the harmonised standards do not comply with the request; and
(b)
no reference to harmonised standards covering the relevant essential health and safety requirements set out in Annex III has been published in the Official Journal of the European Union in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 1025/2012 and no such reference is expected to be published within a reasonable period.
Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 48(3).
4.   Before preparing the draft implementing act referred to in paragraph 3, the Commission shall inform the committee referred to in Article 22 of Regulation (EU) No 1025/2012 that it considers that the conditions in paragraph 3 have been fulfilled.
5.   When preparing the draft implementing act referred to in paragraph 3, the Commission shall take into account the views of relevant bodies or the expert group and shall duly consult all relevant stakeholders.
6.   A product within the scope of this Regulation which is in conformity with the common specifications established by implementing acts referred to in paragraph 3, or parts thereof, shall be presumed to be in conformity with the essential health and safety requirements set out in Annex III covered by those common specifications or parts thereof.
7.   Where a harmonised standard is adopted by a European standardisation organisation and proposed to the Commission for the purpose of publishing its reference in the Official Journal of the European Union, the Commission shall assess the harmonised standard in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 1025/2012. When reference of a harmonised standard is published in the Official Journal of the European Union, the Commission shall repeal the implementing acts referred to in paragraph 3, or parts thereof which cover the same essential health and safety requirements as those covered by that harmonised standard.
8.   When a Member State considers that a common specification does not entirely satisfy the essential health and safety requirements set out in Annex III, it shall inform the Commission thereof by submitting a detailed explanation. The Commission shall assess that detailed explanation and may, if appropriate, amend the implementing act establishing the common specification in question.
9.   Machinery and related products that have been certified or for which a statement of conformity has been issued under a cybersecurity certification scheme adopted in accordance with Regulation (EU) 2019/881 the references of which have been published in the Official Journal of the European Union shall be presumed to be in conformity with the essential health and safety requirements set out in Annex III, sections 1.1.9 and 1.2.1, as regards protection against corruption and safety and reliability of control systems insofar as those requirements are covered by the cybersecurity certificate or statement of conformity or parts thereof.
