Article 14
Obligations of importers of partly completed machinery
1.   Importers shall place only compliant partly completed machinery on the market.
2.   Before placing partly completed machinery on the market, importers shall ensure that the manufacturer has drawn up the technical documentation set out in Annex IV, Part B, that the partly completed machinery is accompanied by the required documents and that the manufacturer has complied with the requirements set out in Article 11(5), (6) and (8).
Where an importer considers or has reason to believe that partly completed machinery is not in conformity with this Regulation, the importer shall not place it on the market until it has been brought into conformity. Furthermore, where the partly completed machinery presents a risk as regards the relevant essential health and safety requirements, the importer shall inform the manufacturer and the market surveillance authorities to that effect.
3.   Importers shall indicate their name, registered trade name or registered trade mark, and the postal address and website, email address or other digital contact at which they can be contacted, on the partly completed machinery or, where that is not possible, on its packaging or in a document accompanying the partly completed machinery. The contact details shall be in a language easily understood by the person who incorporates the partly completed machinery and by the market surveillance authorities.
4.   Importers shall ensure that the partly completed machinery is accompanied by the assembly instructions referred to in Article 11(7).
5.   Importers shall ensure that, while the partly completed machinery is under their responsibility, the storage or transport conditions do not jeopardise the conformity with the relevant essential health and safety requirements set out in Annex III.
6.   Importers who consider or have reason to believe that partly completed machinery which they have placed on the market is not in conformity with this Regulation shall immediately take the corrective actions necessary to bring that partly completed machinery into conformity, to withdraw it or recall it, as appropriate. Furthermore, where the partly completed machinery presents a risk as regards relevant essential health and safety requirements, importers shall immediately inform the competent national authorities of the Member States in which they made the partly completed machinery available on the market to that effect, giving details, in particular, of the non-conformity and of any corrective actions taken.
7.   Importers shall, for at least 10 years after the partly completed machinery has been placed on the market, keep a copy of the EU declaration of incorporation at the disposal of the market surveillance authorities and ensure that the technical documentation set out in Annex IV, Part B can be made available to those authorities upon request.
8.   Importers shall, further to a reasoned request from a competent national authority, provide that authority with all the information and documentation, in paper or digital format, necessary to demonstrate the conformity of the partly completed machinery with this Regulation in a language that can be easily understood by that authority. Importers shall cooperate with that authority, at its request, on any action taken to eliminate the risks as regards the relevant essential health and safety requirements presented by a partly completed machinery, which they have placed on the market.
