Article 5
Competent authorities
1.   Each Member State shall designate one or more competent authorities to be responsible for carrying out the obligations set out in this Regulation. Member State competent authorities and the Commission shall work in close cooperation and be responsible for ensuring the effective and uniform implementation of this Regulation throughout the Union.
2.   Where a Member State has designated more than one competent authority, it shall clearly demarcate their respective duties and establish communication and coordination mechanisms that enable those authorities to collaborate closely and exercise their duties effectively.
3.   No later than 14 December 2025, Member States shall, through the information and communication system referred to in Article 7(1), provide the Commission and the other Member States with the following information:
(a)
the names, addresses and contact details of the competent authority or authorities; and
(b)
the areas of competence of the competent authority or authorities.
Member States shall regularly update the information set out in points (a) and (b).
4.   The Commission shall make the list of competent authorities publicly available on the Forced Labour Single Portal referred to in Article 12 and shall regularly update that list, based on the updates received from Member States.
5.   Member States shall ensure that their competent authorities exercise their powers impartially, transparently and with due respect for the obligations of professional secrecy. Member States shall ensure that their competent authorities have the necessary powers, expertise, and resources to carry out investigations, including sufficient budgetary resources.
6.   Member States shall ensure that their competent authorities coordinate closely and exchange information with the relevant national authorities, such as labour inspection authorities and judicial and law enforcement authorities, including those responsible for the fight against trafficking in human beings, and the authorities designated by Member States under Directive (EU) 2019/1937.
7.   Member States shall confer on their competent authorities the power to impose penalties in accordance with Article 37, either directly, in cooperation with other authorities, or by way of an application to the competent judicial authorities.
