Article 6
Union Network Against Forced Labour Products
1.   A Union Network Against Forced Labour Products (the Network) is hereby established.
2.   The Network shall serve as a platform for structured coordination and cooperation between the competent authorities of the Member States and the Commission, and for streamlining the enforcement of this Regulation, within the Union, thereby making enforcement more effective and coherent.
3.   The Network shall be composed of representatives from each Member State, representatives from the Commission and, where appropriate, representatives from customs authorities.
4.   The Commission shall coordinate the work of the Network. A representative from the Commission shall chair the meetings of the Network.
5.   The secretariat of the Network shall be provided by the Commission. The secretariat shall organise the meetings of the Network and provide it with technical and logistical support.
6.   Members of the Network shall participate actively to ensure efficient coordination and cooperation, and to contribute to the uniform implementation of this Regulation.
7.   The Network shall have the following tasks:
(a)
to facilitate the identification of common enforcement priorities in order to achieve the objective of this Regulation as set out in Article 1;
(b)
to facilitate the coordination of investigations;
(c)
to follow-up on the enforcement of decisions referred to in Article 20;
(d)
upon request from the Commission, to contribute to the development of guidelines referred to in Article 11;
(e)
to facilitate and coordinate the collection and exchange of information, expertise and best practices with regard to the implementation of this Regulation;
(f)
to contribute to uniform risk-based approaches and administrative practices for the implementation of this Regulation;
(g)
to promote best practices in the application of penalties provided for in Article 37;
(h)
to cooperate, as appropriate, with the relevant Commission services, Union bodies, offices and agencies and Member State authorities on the implementation of this Regulation,
(i)
to promote the cooperation, exchange of personnel and visiting programmes among competent authorities and customs authorities, as well as among those competent authorities and competent authorities of third countries and international organisations;
(j)
to facilitate the organisation of training and capacity building activities, regarding the implementation of this Regulation, for the Commission and Union delegations in third countries and competent authorities, customs authorities and other relevant authorities of Member States;
(k)
upon request from the Commission, to provide assistance to the Commission on the development of a coordinated approach to engagement and cooperation with third countries pursuant to Article 13;
(l)
to monitor situations of systemic use of forced labour;
(m)
to assist in the organisation of information and awareness-raising campaigns on this Regulation;
(n)
to promote and facilitate collaboration with regard to exploring possibilities for using new technologies for the enforcement of this Regulation and the traceability of products;
(o)
to collect data on remediation linked to the decisions and evaluation of their effectiveness.
8.   Other relevant Member State authorities may attend meetings of the Network on an ad hoc basis. Experts and stakeholders, including representatives from trade unions and other workers’ organisations, civil society and human rights organisations, business organisations, international organisations, relevant authorities of third countries, the European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights, the European Labour Authority, the relevant Commission services, Union delegations and Union bodies, offices and agencies with expertise in the areas covered by this Regulation may be invited to attend meetings of the Network or to provide written contributions.
9.   The Network shall meet at regular intervals and, where necessary, at the duly motivated request of the Commission or a Member State.
10.   The Commission and the Member States shall ensure that the Network has the necessary resources to carry out the tasks referred to in paragraph 7, including sufficient budgetary resources.
11.   The Network shall establish its rules of procedure.
