Article 21
Review of decisions regarding the violation of Article 3
1.   The lead competent authority shall allow economic operators affected by a decision referred to in Article 20 to request a review of that decision at any time. The request for a review shall contain information which demonstrates that the products are placed or made available on the market or are to be exported in compliance with Article 3. That information shall contain new substantial information that was not brought to the attention of the lead competent authority during the investigation.
2.   The lead competent authority shall take a decision on the request referred to in paragraph 1 within 30 working days of the receipt of that request.
3.   Where economic operators have demonstrated that they have complied with the decision referred to in Article 20, and that they have eliminated forced labour from their operations or supply chain with respect to the products concerned, the lead competent authority shall withdraw its decision for the future, inform the economic operators and remove it from the Forced Labour Single Portal.
4.   Where the Commission acts as the lead competent authority, the withdrawal referred to in paragraph 3 of this Article shall be implemented by means of an implementing act. Such implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 35(2). On duly justified imperative grounds of urgency relating to the protection of rights of defence and of property of the economic operators concerned, the Commission shall adopt immediately applicable implementing acts in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 35(3). Those implementing acts shall remain in force for a period not exceeding 12 months.
5.   Economic operators that have been affected by a decision referred to in Article 20 of a lead competent authority of a Member State shall have access to a court or tribunal to review the procedural and substantive legality of the decision.
6.   Paragraph 5 is without prejudice to any provision of national law which requires that administrative review procedures be exhausted prior to recourse to judicial proceedings.
7.   Decisions referred to in Article 20 adopted by a lead competent authority of a Member State are without prejudice to any decisions of a judicial nature taken by national courts or tribunals of the Member States with respect to the same economic operators or products.
