Article 9
Single information submission point
1.   The Commission shall set up a dedicated centralised mechanism for the submission of information (single information submission point). The single information submission point shall be available in all official languages of the institutions of the Union. It shall be user-friendly and made available free of charge.
2.   Information on alleged violations of Article 3 shall be submitted via the single information submission point by any natural or legal person or any association that does not have a legal personality. Submissions of information shall contain information on the economic operators or products concerned, provide the reasons and evidence substantiating the alleged violations, and where possible, supporting documents. The Commission may adopt implementing acts to specify the procedural rules, templates and details in relation to those submissions of information. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 35(2).
3.   The Commission shall discard any submissions of information to the single information submission point that are manifestly incomplete, unfounded or made in bad faith and distribute the retained submissions of information for assessment by the lead competent authority according to the method for the allocation of investigations set out in Article 15.
4.   The lead competent authority in charge of the assessment referred to in paragraph 3 shall acknowledge receipt of the submission of information, diligently and impartially assess the information and inform the natural or legal person or association concerned of the outcome of the assessment of its submission of information as soon as possible.
5.   The lead competent authority may ask the person or association referred to in paragraph 2 to provide additional information.
6.   In cases where there is a significant lapse of time between the submission of information to the single information submission point and a decision to proceed with an investigation pursuant to Chapter III, the lead competent authority shall, to the extent possible, consult the person or association submitting the information to verify whether the situation has, to the best of their knowledge, changed significantly.
7.   Directive (EU) 2019/1937 shall apply to the reporting of breaches of this Regulation and the protection of persons reporting such breaches.
