Article 120
Publication of information
1.   Member States shall ensure that up-to-date information regarding the implementation of this Directive is made publicly available in a manner that guarantees all interested parties easy access to that information. They shall publish a notice in their national official gazette describing how and where the information is published. The first such notice shall be published before 21 December 2020 and thereafter a notice shall be published where there is any change in the information contained therein.
2.   Member States shall submit to the Commission a copy of all such notices at the time of publication. The Commission shall distribute the information to the Communications Committee as appropriate.
3.   Member States shall ensure that all relevant information on rights, conditions, procedures, charges, fees and decisions concerning general authorisations, rights of use and rights to install facilities is published and kept up to date in an appropriate manner in order to provide easy access to that information for all interested parties.
4.   Where information referred to in paragraph 3 is held at different levels of government, in particular information regarding procedures and conditions on rights to install facilities, the competent authority shall make all reasonable efforts, having regard to the costs involved, to create a user-friendly overview of all such information, including information on the relevant levels of government and the responsible authorities, in order to facilitate applications for rights to install facilities.
5.   Member States shall ensure that the specific obligations imposed on undertakings under this Directive are published and that the specific product and service, and geographical markets are identified. Subject to the need to protect commercial confidentiality, they shall ensure that up-to-date information is made publicly available in a manner that guarantees all interested parties easy access to that information.
6.   Member States shall provide the Commission with information that they make publicly available pursuant to paragraph 5. The Commission shall make that information available in a readily accessible form, and shall distribute the information to the Communications Committee as appropriate.
