Article 94
Procedure for granting of rights of use for numbering resources
1.   Where it is necessary to grant individual rights of use for numbering resources, national regulatory or other competent authorities shall grant such rights, upon request, to any undertaking for the provision of electronic communications networks or services covered by a general authorisation referred to in Article 12, subject to Article 13 and to point (c) of Article 21(1) and to any other rules ensuring the efficient use of those numbering resources in accordance with this Directive.
2.   The rights of use for numbering resources shall be granted through open, objective, transparent, non-discriminatory and proportionate procedures.
When granting rights of use for numbering resources, national regulatory or other competent authorities shall specify whether those rights can be transferred by the holder of the rights, and under which conditions.
Where national regulatory or other competent authorities grant rights of use for numbering resources for a limited period, the duration of that period shall be appropriate for the service concerned with a view to the objective pursued, taking due account of the need to allow for an appropriate period for investment amortisation.
3.   National regulatory or other competent authorities shall take decisions on the granting of rights of use for numbering resources as soon as possible after receipt of the complete application and within three weeks in the case of numbering resources that have been allocated for specific purposes within the national numbering plan. Such decisions shall be made public.
4.   Where national regulatory or other competent authorities have determined, after consulting interested parties in accordance with Article 23, that rights of use for numbering resources of exceptional economic value are to be granted through competitive or comparative selection procedures, national regulatory or other competent authorities may extend the three-week period referred to in paragraph 3 of this Article by up to a further three weeks.
5.   National regulatory or other competent authorities shall not limit the number of individual rights of use to be granted, except where this is necessary to ensure the efficient use of numbering resources.
6.   Where the rights of use for numbering resources include their extraterritorial use within the Union in accordance with Article 93(4), national regulatory or other competent authorities shall attach to those rights of use specific conditions in order to ensure compliance with all the relevant national consumer protection rules and national law related to the use of numbering resources applicable in the Member States where the numbering resources are used.
Upon request from a national regulatory or other competent authority of a Member State where the numbering resources are used, demonstrating a breach of relevant consumer protection rules or national laws related to the use of numbering resources of that Member State, the national regulatory or other competent authorities of the Member State where the rights of use for the numbering resources have been granted shall enforce the conditions attached under the first subparagraph of this paragraph in accordance with Article 30, including, in serious cases, by withdrawing the rights of extraterritorial use for the numbering resources granted to the undertaking concerned.
BEREC shall facilitate and coordinate the exchange of information between the competent authorities of the different Member States involved and ensure the appropriate coordination of work among them.
7.   This Article shall also apply where national regulatory or other competent authorities grant rights of use for numbering resources to undertakings other than providers of electronic communications networks or services in accordance with Article 93(2).
