Article 30
Compliance with the conditions of the general authorisation or of rights of use for radio spectrum and for numbering resources and compliance with specific obligations
1.   Member States shall ensure that their relevant competent authorities monitor and supervise compliance with the conditions of the general authorisation or of rights of use for radio spectrum and for numbering resources, with the specific obligations referred to in Article 13(2) and with the obligation to use radio spectrum effectively and efficiently in accordance with Article 4, Article 45(1) and Article 47.
Competent authorities shall have the power to require undertakings subject to the general authorisation or benefitting from rights of use for radio spectrum or for numbering resources to provide all information necessary to verify compliance with the conditions of the general authorisation or of rights of use for radio spectrum and for numbering resources or with the specific obligations referred to in Article 13(2) or Article 47, in accordance with Article 21.
2.   Where a competent authority finds that an undertaking does not comply with one or more of the conditions of the general authorisation or of rights of use for radio spectrum and for numbering resources, or with the specific obligations referred to in Article 13(2), it shall notify the undertaking of those findings and give the undertaking the opportunity to state its views, within a reasonable time limit.
3.   The competent authority shall have the power to require the cessation of the breach referred to in paragraph 2 either immediately or within a reasonable time limit and shall take appropriate and proportionate measures aimed at ensuring compliance.
In this regard, Member States shall empower the competent authorities to impose:
(a)
where appropriate, dissuasive financial penalties which may include periodic penalties with retroactive effect; and
(b)
orders to cease or delay provision of a service or bundle of services which, if continued, would result in significant harm to competition, pending compliance with access obligations imposed following a market analysis carried out in accordance with Article 67.
The competent authorities shall communicate the measures and the reasons on which they are based to the undertaking concerned without delay and shall stipulate a reasonable period for the undertaking to comply with the measures.
4.   Notwithstanding paragraphs 2 and 3 of this Article, Member States shall empower the competent authority to impose, where appropriate, financial penalties on undertakings for failure to provide information, in accordance with the obligations imposed under point (a) or (b) of the first subparagraph of Article 21(1) and Article 69, within a reasonable period set by the competent authority.
5.   In the case of a serious breach or repeated breaches of the conditions of the general authorisation or of the rights of use for radio spectrum and for numbering resources, or of the specific obligations referred to in Article 13(2) or Article 47(1) or (2), where measures aimed at ensuring compliance as referred to in paragraph 3 of this Article have failed, Member States shall empower competent authorities to prevent an undertaking from continuing to provide electronic communications networks or services or suspend or withdraw those rights of use. Member States shall empower the competent authority to impose penalties which are effective, proportionate and dissuasive. Such penalties may be applied to cover the period of any breach, even if the breach has subsequently been rectified.
6.   Notwithstanding paragraphs 2, 3 and 5 of this Article, the competent authority may take urgent interim measures to remedy the situation in advance of reaching a final decision, where it has evidence of a breach of the conditions of the general authorisation, of the rights of use for radio spectrum and for numbering resources, or of the specific obligations referred to in Article 13(2) or Article 47(1) or (2) which represents an immediate and serious threat to public safety, public security or public health or risks creating serious economic or operational problems for other providers or users of electronic communications networks or services or other users of the radio spectrum. The competent authority shall give the undertaking concerned a reasonable opportunity to state its views and propose any remedies. Where appropriate, the competent authority may confirm the interim measures, which shall be valid for a maximum of three months, but which may, in circumstances where enforcement procedures have not been completed, be extended for a further period of up to three months.
7.   Undertakings shall have the right to appeal against measures taken under this Article in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 31.
