Article 93
Numbering resources
1.   Member States shall ensure that national regulatory or other competent authorities control the granting of rights of use for all national numbering resources and the management of the national numbering plans and that they provide adequate numbering resources for the provision of publicly available electronic communications services. Member States shall ensure that objective, transparent and non-discriminatory procedures for granting rights of use for national numbering resources are established.
2.   National regulatory or other competent authorities may also grant rights of use for numbering resources from the national numbering plans for the provision of specific services to undertakings other than providers of electronic communications networks or services, provided that adequate numbering resources are made available to satisfy current and foreseeable future demand. Those undertakings shall demonstrate their ability to manage the numbering resources and to comply with any relevant requirements set out pursuant to Article 94. National regulatory or other competent authorities may suspend the further granting of rights of use for numbering resources to such undertakings if it is demonstrated that there is a risk of exhaustion of numbering resources.
By 21 June 2020, in order to contribute to the consistent application of this paragraph, BEREC shall adopt, after consulting stakeholders and in close cooperation with the Commission, guidelines on common criteria for the assessment of the ability to manage numbering resources and of the risk of exhaustion of numbering resources.
3.   National regulatory or other competent authorities shall ensure that national numbering plans and procedures are applied in a manner that gives equal treatment to all providers of publicly available electronic communications services and the undertakings eligible in accordance with paragraph 2. In particular, Member States shall ensure that an undertaking to which the right of use for numbering resources has been granted does not discriminate against other providers of electronic communications services as regards the numbering resources used to give access to their services.
4.   Each Member State shall ensure that national regulatory or other competent authorities make available a range of non-geographic numbers which may be used for the provision of electronic communications services other than interpersonal communications services, throughout the territory of the Union, without prejudice to Regulation (EU) No 531/2012 and Article 97(2) of this Directive. Where rights of use for numbering resources have been granted in accordance with paragraph 2 of this Article to undertakings other than providers of electronic communications networks or services, this paragraph shall apply to the specific services for the provision of which the rights of use have been granted.
National regulatory or other competent authorities shall ensure that the conditions listed in Part E of Annex I that may be attached to the rights of use for numbering resources used for the provision of services outside the Member State of the country code, and their enforcement, are as stringent as the conditions and enforcement applicable to services provided within the Member State of the country code, in accordance with this Directive. National regulatory or other competent authorities shall also ensure in accordance with Article 94(6) that providers using numbering resources of their country code in other Member States comply with consumer protection and other national rules related to the use of numbering resources applicable in those Member States where the numbering resources are used. This obligation is without prejudice to the enforcement powers of the competent authorities of those Member States.
BEREC shall assist national regulatory or other competent authorities, at their request, in coordinating their activities to ensure the efficient management of numbering resources with a right of extraterritorial use within the Union.
In order to facilitate the monitoring by the national regulatory or other competent authorities of compliance with the requirements of this paragraph, BEREC shall establish a database on the numbering resources with a right of extraterritorial use within the Union. For this purpose, national regulatory or other competent authorities shall transmit the relevant information to BEREC. Where numbering resources with a right of extraterritorial use within the Union are not granted by the national regulatory authority, the competent authority responsible for their granting or management shall consult the national regulatory authority.
5.   Member States shall ensure that the ‘00’ code is the standard international access code. Special arrangements for the use of number-based interpersonal communications services between locations adjacent to one another across borders between Member States may be established or continued.
Member States may agree to share a common numbering plan for all or specific categories of numbers.
End-users affected by such arrangements or agreements shall be fully informed.
6.   Without prejudice to Article 106, Member States shall promote over-the-air provisioning, where technically feasible, to facilitate switching of providers of electronic communications networks or services by end-users, in particular providers and end-users of machine-to-machine services.
7.   Member States shall ensure that the national numbering plans, and all subsequent additions or amendments thereto, are published, subject only to limitations imposed on the grounds of national security.
8.   Member States shall support the harmonisation of specific numbers or numbering ranges within the Union where it promotes both the functioning of the internal market and the development of pan-European services. Where necessary to address unmet cross-border or pan-European demand for numbering resources, the Commission shall, taking utmost account of the opinion of BEREC, adopt implementing acts harmonising specific numbers or numbering ranges.
Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 118(4).
