Article 7
Eligible measures
1.   A financial contribution from the EGF may be made for active labour market policy measures that form part of a coordinated package, designed to facilitate the reintegration of the targeted beneficiaries, in particular the most disadvantaged among them, into employment or self-employment.
2.   Given the importance of skills required in the digital industrial age and in a resource-efficient economy, the dissemination of such skills shall be considered to be a horizontal element for the design of coordinated packages. The need for and level of training shall be adapted to the qualifications and skills of each beneficiary.
The coordinated package may include:
(a)
tailor-made training and retraining, including with regard to information and communication technology and other skills required in the digital age, certification of acquired knowledge and skills, individual job-search assistance services and targeted group activities, occupational guidance, advisory services, mentoring, outplacement assistance, entrepreneurship promotion, aid for self-employment, business creation, employee take-overs, and cooperation activities;
(b)
special time-limited measures, such as job-search allowances, employers’ recruitment incentives, mobility allowances, childcare allowances, training allowances, subsistence allowances, and allowances for carers.
The costs of the measures referred to in point (b) of the second subparagraph shall not exceed 35 % of the total cost of the coordinated package.
The investments for self-employment, business creation and employee take-overs shall not exceed EUR 22 000 per beneficiary.
The design of the coordinated package shall anticipate future labour market perspectives and required skills. The coordinated package shall be compatible with the shift towards a resource-efficient and sustainable economy, shall focus on the dissemination of skills required in the digital industrial age, and shall take into account the demand on the local labour market.
3.   The following measures shall not be eligible for a financial contribution from the EGF:
(a)
special time-limited measures, as referred to in point (b) of the second subparagraph of paragraph 2, if those measures are not conditional on the active participation of the targeted beneficiaries in job-search or training activities;
(b)
measures which are the responsibility of enterprises by virtue of national law or collective agreements.
The measures supported by the EGF shall not replace passive social protection measures.
4.   The coordinated package shall be drawn up in consultation with the targeted beneficiaries, their representatives or the social partners, as applicable.
5.   At the initiative of the applicant Member State, a financial contribution from the EGF may be made for preparatory, management, information and publicity, and control and reporting activities.
