Article 22
Evaluations
1.   On its own initiative and in close cooperation with the Member States, the Commission shall carry out:
(a)
a mid-term evaluation by 30 June 2025; and
(b)
a retrospective evaluation by 31 December 2029.
2.   The results of the evaluations referred to in paragraph 1 shall be submitted to the European Parliament, the Council, the Court of Auditors, the European Economic and Social Committee, the Committee of the Regions and the social partners for information. The recommendations of the evaluations shall be taken into account for the design of new programmes in the area of employment and social affairs or the further development of existing programmes.
3.   The evaluations referred to in paragraph 1 shall include relevant statistics on the financial contributions, broken down by sector and Member State.
4.   A beneficiary survey shall be launched during the sixth month after the end of each implementation period. The beneficiary survey shall be open to participation for at least four weeks. Member States shall distribute the beneficiary survey to the beneficiaries, send out at least one reminder and inform the Commission of the distribution and reminder sent. The responses to the beneficiary surveys shall be collated and analysed by the Commission for the use in future evaluations.
5.   Beneficiary surveys shall be used to collect data on the perceived change in the employability of beneficiaries, or, for those who have already found employment, on the quality of the employment found, such as changes in working hours, the type of employment contract or relationship (full time or part time; fixed term or open-ended), the level of responsibility or change of salary level in comparison to previous employment, and the sector in which the person found employment. That information shall be broken down by gender, age group, education level and level of professional experience.
6.   In order to ensure uniform conditions for the implementation of this Article, the Commission shall adopt an implementing act setting out when and how a beneficiary survey is to be conducted and the template to be used.
That implementing act shall be adopted in accordance with the advisory procedure referred to in Article 26(2).
