Article 12
Information, communication and publicity
1.   The Member States shall acknowledge the origin and ensure the visibility of the Union funding and highlight the Union added value of the intervention, by providing coherent, effective and targeted information to multiple audiences, including targeted information to beneficiaries, local and regional authorities, the social partners, the media and the public.
Member States shall use the EU emblem in accordance with Annex IX to the Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council laying down common provisions on the European Regional Development Fund, the European Social Fund Plus, the Cohesion Fund, the Just Transition Fund and the European Maritime, Fisheries and Aquaculture Fund and financial rules for those and for the Asylum, Migration and Integration Fund, the Internal Security Fund and the Instrument for Financial Support for Border Management and Visa Policy (the ‘Common Provisions Regulation for 2021-2027’) together with the simple funding statement, ‘co-funded by the European Union’.
2.   The Commission shall maintain and update regularly an online presence, accessible in all official languages of the institutions of the Union, to provide updated information about the EGF, guidance on the submission of applications, examples of eligible measures and a regularly updated list of Member State contacts as well as information about accepted and rejected applications and on the role of the European Parliament and the Council in the budgetary procedure.
3.   The Commission shall promote the broad dissemination of existing best practices and shall carry out information and communication actions with the aim of raising the awareness of Union citizens and workers, including people who have difficulties in accessing information, of the EGF.
The Member States shall ensure that communication and visibility material is made available upon request to Union institutions, bodies or agencies and that a royalty-free, non-exclusive and irrevocable licence to use such material and any pre-existing rights attached to it is granted to the Union, to publicise the EGF or in relation to reporting on the use of the Union budget. That obligation shall not require Member States to take on significant additional costs or significant administrative burdens.
The licence shall grant the Union the rights set out in Annex I.
4.   The resources allocated to communication actions under this Regulation shall also contribute to covering the corporate communication of the political priorities of the Union provided that such priorities are related to the objectives laid down in Article 2.
