Article 8
Applications
1.   The applicant Member State shall submit an application for a financial contribution from the EGF to the Commission within 12 weeks of the date on which the criteria set out in Article 4(2), (3) or (4) are met.
2.   The time limit referred to in paragraph 1 shall be suspended between 1 January 2021 and 3 May 2021.
3.   If requested by the applicant Member State, the Commission shall provide guidance throughout the application procedure.
4.   Within 10 working days of the date of submission of the application, or, where applicable, within 10 working days of the date on which the Commission is in possession of a translation of the application, whichever is the later, the Commission shall acknowledge receipt of the application and request from the applicant Member State any additional information that it requires in order to assess the application.
5.   Where the Commission requests additional information, the Member State shall reply within 15 working days of the date of the request. The Commission shall extend that deadline by 10 working days at the request of the applicant Member State. Any such requests for extension shall be duly reasoned.
6.   On the basis of the information provided by the applicant Member State, the Commission shall complete its assessment of the compliance of the application with the conditions for providing a financial contribution within 50 working days of the receipt of the complete application or, where applicable, of the translation of the application.
Where the Commission is not able to meet that deadline, it shall inform the applicant Member State before that deadline, explaining the reasons for the delay and setting a new date for the completion of its assessment. That new date shall be no later than 20 working days after the deadline under the first subparagraph.
7.   An application shall contain the following information:
(a)
an assessment of the number of redundancies in accordance with Article 5, as well as the method of calculation;
(b)
where the dismissing enterprise has continued its activities after the redundancies, confirmation that it has complied with its legal obligations governing those redundancies and has provided for its workers accordingly;
(c)
an explanation of the extent to which the recommendations set out in the EU Quality Framework for anticipation of change and restructuring were taken into account, and how the coordinated package complements actions funded by other Union or national funds, including information about measures that are mandatory for the dismissing enterprises concerned by virtue of national law or collective agreements, and information about the activities already undertaken by the Member State for the assistance of displaced workers;
(d)
a brief description of the events that led to the displacement of the workers;
(e)
where applicable, the identification of the dismissing enterprises, suppliers or downstream producers and sectors;
(f)
an estimated breakdown of the composition of the targeted beneficiaries by gender, age group and educational level, used in the design of the coordinated package;
(g)
the expected impact of the redundancies as regards the local, regional or national economy and employment;
(h)
a detailed description of the coordinated package and related expenditure, including, in particular, any measures in support of employment initiatives for disadvantaged, young and older beneficiaries;
(i)
the estimated budget for each of the components of the coordinated package in support of the targeted beneficiaries and for any preparatory, management, information and publicity, control and reporting activities;
(j)
the dates on which the provision of the coordinated package to the targeted beneficiaries and the activities to implement the EGF, as set out in Article 7, were started or are due to be started;
(k)
the procedures followed for consulting the targeted beneficiaries or their representatives or the social partners as well as local and regional authorities or other relevant stakeholders as applicable;
(l)
a statement that the requested EGF support complies with the procedural and material Union rules on State aid as well as a statement outlining why thecoordinated package does not replace measures that are the responsibility of employers by virtue of national law or collective agreements;
(m)
the sources of national pre-financing or national co-funding and other co-funding, if applicable.
