Article 8
1.   The tariff preferences referred to in Article 7 shall be suspended, in respect of products of a GSP section originating in a GSP beneficiary country, when the average value of Union imports of such products over three consecutive years from that GSP beneficiary country exceeds the thresholds listed in Annex VI. The thresholds shall be calculated as a percentage of the total value of Union imports of the same products from all GSP beneficiary countries.
2.   Prior to the application of the tariff preferences provided for in this Regulation, the Commission shall adopt an implementing act establishing, in accordance with the advisory procedure referred to in Article 39(2), a list of GSP sections for which the tariff preferences referred to in Article 7 are suspended in respect of a GSP beneficiary country. That implementing act shall apply as from 1 January 2014.
3.   The Commission shall, every three years, review the list referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article and adopt an implementing act, in accordance with the advisory procedure referred to in Article 39(2), in order to suspend or to re-establish the tariff preferences referred to in Article 7. That implementing act shall apply as of 1 January of the year following its entry in force.
4.   The list referred to in paragraphs 2 and 3 of this Article shall be established on the basis of the data available on 1 September of the year in which the review is conducted and of the two years preceding the review year. It shall take into account imports from GSP beneficiary countries listed in Annex II as applicable at that time. However, the value of imports from GSP beneficiary countries, which upon the date of application of the suspension, no longer benefit from the tariff preferences under point (b) of Article 4(1) shall not be taken into account.
5.   The Commission shall notify the country concerned of the implementing act adopted in accordance with paragraphs 2 and 3.
6.   Where Annex II is amended in accordance with the criteria laid down in Article 4, the Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 36 to amend Annex VI in order to adjust the modalities listed in that Annex so as to maintain proportionally the same weight of the graduated product sections as defined in paragraph 1 of this Article.
