Article 10
1.   The special incentive arrangement for sustainable development and good governance shall be granted if the following conditions are met:
(a)
a GSP beneficiary country has made a request to that effect; and
(b)
examination of the request shows that the requesting country fulfils the conditions laid down in Article 9(1).
2.   The requesting country shall submit its request to the Commission in writing. The request shall provide comprehensive information concerning the ratification of the relevant conventions and shall include the binding undertakings referred to in points (d), (e) and (f) of Article 9(1).
3.   After receiving a request, the Commission shall notify the European Parliament and the Council thereof.
4.   After examining the request, the Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts, in accordance with Article 36, to establish or to amend Annex III in order to grant a requesting country the special incentive arrangement for sustainable development and good governance by adding that country to the list of GSP+ beneficiary countries.
5.   Where a GSP+ beneficiary country no longer fulfils the conditions referred to in points (a) or (c) of Article 9(1), or withdraws any of its binding undertakings referred to in points (d), (e) and (f) of Article 9(1), the Commission shall be empowered to adopt a delegated act, in accordance with Article 36, to amend Annex III in order to remove that country from the list of GSP+ beneficiary countries.
6.   The Commission shall notify the requesting country of a decision taken in accordance with paragraphs 4 and 5 of this Article after Annex III is amended and published in the Official Journal of the European Union. Where the requesting country is granted the special incentive arrangement, it shall be informed of the date on which the respective delegated act enters into force.
7.   The Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts, in accordance with Article 36, to establish rules related to the procedure for granting the special incentive arrangement for sustainable development and good governance in particular with respect to deadlines and the submission and processing of requests.
