Article 9
Obligations of distributors
1.   When making an instrument available on the market distributors shall act with due care in relation to the requirements of this Directive.
2.   Before making an instrument intended to be used for the applications listed in points (a) to (f) of Article 1(2) available on the market, distributors shall verify that the instrument bears the CE marking, and the supplementary metrology marking, that it is accompanied by the required documents and by instructions and information in a language which can be easily understood by end-users in the Member State in which the instrument is to be made available on the market, and that the manufacturer and the importer have complied with the requirements set out in Article 6(5) and (6) and Article 8(3) respectively.
Where a distributor considers or has reason to believe that an instrument intended to be used for the applications listed in points (a) to (f) of Article 1(2) is not in conformity with the essential requirements set out in Annex I, he shall not make the instrument available on the market until it has been brought into conformity. Furthermore, where the instrument presents a risk, the distributor shall inform the manufacturer or the importer to that effect as well as the market surveillance authorities.
Before making an instrument not intended to be used for the applications listed in points (a) to (f) of Article 1(2) available on the market, distributors shall verify that the manufacturer and the importer have complied with the requirements set out in Article 6(5) and (6) and Article 8(3) respectively.
3.   Distributors shall ensure that, while an instrument intended to be used for the applications listed in points (a) to (f) of Article 1(2) is under their responsibility, its storage or transport conditions do not jeopardise its compliance with the essential requirements set out in Annex I.
4.   Distributors who consider or have reason to believe that an instrument which they have made available on the market is not in conformity with this Directive shall make sure that the corrective measures necessary to bring that instrument into conformity, to withdraw it or recall it, if appropriate, are taken. Furthermore, where the instrument presents a risk, distributors shall immediately inform the competent national authorities of the Member States in which they made the instrument available on the market to that effect, giving details, in particular, of the non-compliance and of any corrective measures taken.
5.   Distributors shall, further to a reasoned request from a competent national authority, provide it with all the information and documentation in paper or electronic form necessary to demonstrate the conformity of an instrument. They shall cooperate with that authority, at its request, on any action taken to eliminate the risks posed by instruments which they have made available on the market.
