Article 27
Evaluation
1.   No later than 31 December 2017, the Commission, in cooperation with the Member States and beneficiaries concerned, shall prepare an evaluation report to be presented to the European Parliament and the Council by the Commission on the achievement of the objectives of all the measures (at the level of results and impacts), the efficiency of the use of resources and the European added value of the CEF, with a view to deciding on the renewal, modification or suspension of the measures. The evaluation shall also address the scope for simplification, the internal and external coherence of the measures, the continued relevance of all objectives and their contribution to the Union priorities of smart, sustainable and inclusive growth, including their impact on economic, social and territorial cohesion. The evaluation report shall include an assessment of the economies of scale made by the Commission at a financial, technical and human level when managing the CEF and, where applicable, of the total number of projects harnessing the synergies between the sectors. That assessment shall also examine how to make financial instruments more effective. The evaluation report shall take into account evaluation results concerning the long-term impact of the predecessor measures.
2.   The CEF shall take into account the independent full-scale evaluation of the Europe 2020 Project Bond Initiative, to be carried out in 2015. On the basis of that evaluation, the Commission and the Member States shall assess the relevance of the Europe 2020 Project Bond Initiative and its effectiveness in increasing the volume of investment in priority projects and enhancing the efficiency of Union spending.
3.   The Commission shall carry out ex post evaluation in close cooperation with the Member States and beneficiaries. The ex post evaluation shall examine the effectiveness and efficiency of the CEF and its impact on economic, social and territorial cohesion, as well as its contribution to the Union priorities of smart, sustainable and inclusive growth and the scale and results of support used with a view to attaining climate-change objectives.
4.   Evaluations shall take account of progress as measured against the performance indicators referred to in Articles 3 and 4.
5.   The Commission shall communicate the conclusions of those evaluations to the European Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions.
6.   The Commission and the Member States, assisted by the other possible beneficiaries, may undertake an evaluation of the methods of carrying out projects as well as the impact of their implementation, in order to assess whether the objectives, including those relating to environmental protection, have been attained.
7.   The Commission may request a Member State concerned by a project of common interest to provide a specific evaluation of the actions and the linked projects financed under this Regulation or, where appropriate, to supply it with the information and assistance required to undertake an evaluation of such projects.
