Article 11
Specific calls for funds transferred from the Cohesion Fund in the transport sector
1.   As regards the amount of EUR 11 305 500 000 transferred from the Cohesion Fund to be spent exclusively in Member States eligible for funding from the Cohesion Fund, specific calls shall be launched for projects implementing the core network or for projects and horizontal priorities identified in Part I of Annex I exclusively in Member States eligible for funding from the Cohesion Fund.
2.   Applicable rules for the transport sector under this Regulation shall apply to such specific calls. Until 31 December 2016, the selection of projects eligible for financing shall respect the national allocations under the Cohesion Fund. With effect from 1 January 2017, resources transferred to the CEF which have not been committed to a transport infrastructure project shall be made available to all Member States eligible for funding from the Cohesion Fund, to finance transport infrastructure projects in accordance with this Regulation.
3.   In order to support Member States eligible for funding from the Cohesion Fund which may experience difficulties in designing projects that are of sufficient maturity and/or quality and which have sufficient added value for the Union, particular attention shall be given to programme support actions aimed at strengthening institutional capacity and the efficiency of public administrations and public services in relation to the development and implementation of projects listed in Part I of Annex I. To ensure the highest possible absorption of the transferred funds in all Member States eligible for funding from the Cohesion Fund, the Commission may organise additional calls.
4.   The amount of EUR 11 305 500 000 transferred from the Cohesion Fund may be used to commit budgetary resources to financial instruments under this Regulation only as from 1 January 2017. From that date, the amount of EUR 11 305 500 000 transferred from the Cohesion Fund may be used to commit budgetary resources to projects for which contractual commitments have already been entered into by the entrusted entities.
5.   Notwithstanding Article 10, and as regards the amount of EUR 11 305 500 000 transferred from the Cohesion Fund to be spent exclusively in Member States eligible for funding from the Cohesion Fund, the maximum funding rates shall be those applicable to the Cohesion Fund as referred to in a Regulation laying down common provisions on the European Regional Development Fund, the European Social Fund, the Cohesion Fund, the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development and the European Maritime and Fisheries Fund and laying down general provision on the European Regional Development Fund, the European Social Fund and the Cohesion Fund for the following:
(a)
actions with regard to grants for studies;
(b)
actions with regard to grants for works:
(i)
railways and inland waterways;
(ii)
actions to support cross-border road sections and, in the case of Member States with no rail networks, the TEN-T road network;
(iii)
actions for inland transport, connections to and the development of multimodal logistics platforms including connections to inland and maritime ports and airports, including automatic gauge-changing facilities, and the development of ports including ice-breaking capacities, as well as interconnecting points, with particular attention being given to rail connections, except in the case of Member States with no rail network;
(c)
actions with regard to grants for telematic applications systems and services:
(i)
ERTMS, RIS and VTMIS, the SESAR system and ITS for the road sector;
(ii)
other telematic applications systems;
(iii)
actions to support the development of motorways of the sea;
(d)
actions with regard to grants to support new technologies and innovation for all modes of transport.
