Article 17
Multiannual and/or annual work programmes
1.   The Commission shall adopt, by means of implementing acts, multiannual and annual work programmes for each of the transport, telecommunications and energy sectors. The Commission may also adopt multiannual and annual work programmes that cover more than one sector. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 25(2).
2.   The Commission shall review the multiannual work programmes at least at mid-term. If necessary, it shall revise the multiannual work programme by means of an implementing act. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 25(2).
3.   The Commission shall adopt the multiannual work programmes in the transport sector for projects of common interest as listed in Part I of Annex I.
The amount of the financial envelope shall lie within a range of 80 % to 85 % of the budgetary resources referred to in point (a) of Article 5(1).
The projects detailed in Part I of Annex I are not binding on the Member States for their programming decisions. The decision to implement those projects is a competence of Member States and depends on public financing capacities, and on their socio-economic viability in accordance with Article 7 of Regulation (EU) No 1315/2013.
4.   The Commission shall adopt the annual work programmes for the transport, telecommunications and energy sectors for projects of common interest which are not included in the multiannual work programmes.
5.   The Commission, when adopting multiannual and sectoral annual work programmes, shall establish the selection and award criteria in line with the objectives and priorities laid down in Articles 3 and 4 of this Regulation and in Regulations (EU) No 1315/2013 and (EU) No 347/2013 or in a Regulation on guidelines for trans-European networks in the area of telecommunications infrastructure. When setting the award criteria, the Commission shall take into account the general orientations laid down in Part V of Annex I to this Regulation.
6.   In the energy sector, in the first two annual work programmes, priority consideration shall be given to projects of common interest and related actions aimed at ending energy isolation and eliminating energy bottlenecks, and at the completion of the internal energy market.
7.   Work programmes shall be coordinated in such a way as to exploit the synergies between transport, energy and telecommunications, in particular in such areas as smart energy grids, electric mobility, intelligent and sustainable transport systems, joint rights of way or infrastructure coupling. The Commission shall adopt at least one multi-sectoral call for proposals for actions eligible under Article 7(5), with the financial amounts allocated for each sector being weighted according to each sector's relative involvement in the eligible costs of the actions selected for financing under the CEF.
