Article 10
Funding rates
1.   Except in those cases referred to in Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012, proposals shall be selected on the basis of calls for proposals based on the work programmes referred to in Article 17 of this Regulation.
2.   In the transport sector, the amount of Union financial assistance shall not exceed:
(a)
with regard to grants for studies, 50 % of the eligible costs;
(b)
with regard to grants for works:
(i)
for railway networks, and road networks in the case of Member States with no railway network established in their territory or in the case of a Member State, or part thereof, with an isolated network without long-distance rail freight transport: 20 % of the eligible costs; the funding rate may be increased to a maximum of 30 % for actions addressing bottlenecks and to 40 % for actions concerning cross-border sections and actions enhancing rail interoperability;
(ii)
for inland waterways: 20 % of the eligible costs; the funding rate may be increased to a maximum of 40 % for actions addressing bottlenecks and to a maximum of 40 % for actions concerning cross-border sections;
(iii)
for inland transport, connections to and the development of multimodal logistics platforms including connections to inland and maritime ports and airports, as well as the development of ports: 20 % of the eligible costs;
(iv)
for actions to reduce rail freight noise including by retrofitting existing rolling stock: 20 % of the eligible costs up to a combined ceiling of 1 % of the budgetary resources referred to in point (a) of Article 5(1);
(v)
for better accessibility to transport infrastructure for disabled persons: 30 % of the eligible cost of adaptation works, not exceeding in any case 10 % of the total eligible cost of works;
(vi)
for actions supporting new technologies and innovation for all modes of transport: 20 % of the eligible costs;
(vii)
for actions to support cross-border road sections: 10 % of the eligible costs;
(c)
with regard to grants for telematic applications systems and services:
(i)
for land-based components of the ERTMS, of the SESAR system, of RIS and of VTMIS: 50 % of the eligible costs;
(ii)
for land-based components of ITS for the road sector: 20 % of the eligible costs;
(iii)
for on-board components of ERTMS: 50 % of the eligible costs;
(iv)
for on-board components of the SESAR system, of RIS, of VTMIS and of ITS for the road sector: 20 % of the eligible costs, up to a combined ceiling of 5 % of the budgetary resources referred to in point (a) of Article 5(1);
(v)
for actions to support the development of motorways of the sea: 30 % of the eligible costs.
The Commission shall create conditions conducive to the development of projects involving motorways of the sea with third countries;
(vi)
for telematic applications systems other than those mentioned in points (i) to (iv), freight transport services and secure parkings on the road core network: 20 % of the eligible costs.
3.   In the energy sector, the amount of Union financial assistance shall not exceed 50 % of the eligible cost of studies and/or works. The funding rates may be increased to a maximum of 75 % for actions which, based on the evidence referred to in Article 14(2) of Regulation (EU) No 347/2013, provide a high degree of regional or Union-wide security of supply, strengthen the solidarity of the Union or comprise highly innovative solutions.
4.   In the telecommunications sector, the amount of Union financial assistance shall not exceed:
(a)
for actions in the field of generic services: 75 % of the eligible costs;
(b)
for horizontal actions including infrastructure mapping, twinning and technical assistance: 75 % of the eligible costs.
The core service platforms shall be typically funded by procurement. In exceptional cases, they may be funded by a grant covering up to 100 % of eligible costs, without prejudice to the co-financing principle.
5.   The funding rates may be increased by up to 10 percentage points over the percentages laid down in paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 for actions with synergies between at least two of the sectors covered by the CEF. This increase shall not apply to the funding rates referred to in Article 11.
6.   The amount of financial assistance to be granted to the actions selected shall be modulated on the basis of a cost-benefit analysis of each project, the availability of Union budget resources and the need to maximise the leverage of Union funding.
