Article 21
Delegated acts
1.   Subject to the approval of the Member State(s) concerned as provided for in the second paragraph of Article 172 TFEU, the Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 26 of this Regulation concerning the modification of Part I of Annex I to this Regulation, to take account of changing financing priorities in the trans-European networks and of changes relating to projects of common interest identified in Regulation (EU) No 1315/2013. When amending Part I of Annex I to this Regulation, the Commission shall ensure:
(a)
that the projects of common interest in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 1315/2013 are likely to be realised fully or partly under the multiannual financial framework for the years 2014-2020;
(b)
that the modifications comply with the eligibility criteria set out in Article 7 of this Regulation;
(c)
as regards Part I of Annex I to this Regulation, that all sections include infrastructure projects the realisation of which will necessitate their inclusion in a multiannual work programme under Article 17(3) of this Regulation, without changing the alignment of the core network corridors.
2.   The Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 26 of this Regulation to modify the main terms, conditions and procedures laid down in Part III of Annex I to this Regulation governing the Union contribution to each financial instrument established under the Debt Framework or Equity Framework laid down in Part III of Annex I to this Regulation in accordance with the results of the interim report and the independent full -scale evaluation of the pilot phase of the Europe 2020 Project Bond Initiative established under Decision No 1639/2006/EC and Regulation (EC) No 680/2007, and in order to take into account changing market conditions with a view to optimising the design and implementation of the financial instruments under this Regulation.
When amending Part III of Annex I to this Regulation in the cases set out in the first subparagraph, the Commission shall at all times ensure that:
(a)
the amendments are made in accordance with the requirements laid down in Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012, including the ex ante evaluation referred to in point (f) of Article 140(2) thereof, and
(b)
the amendments are limited to:
(i)
modification of the threshold of the subordinated debt financing as referred to in I.1(a) and I.1(b) of Part III of Annex I to this Regulation, with a view to seeking sectoral diversification and geographical balance across the Member States in accordance with Article 15;
(ii)
modification of the threshold of the senior debt financing as referred in I.1(a) of Part III of Annex I to this Regulation, with a view to seeking sectoral diversification and geographical balance across the Member States in accordance with Article 15;
(iii)
the combination with other sources of funding as referred in I.3 and II.3 of Part III of Annex I;
(iv)
the selection of entrusted entities as referred in I.4 and II.4 of Part III of Annex I; and
(v)
pricing, risk and revenue-sharing as referred in I.6 and II.6 of Part III of Annex I.
3.   In the transport sector, and within the general objectives set out in Article 3 and the specific sectoral objectives referred to in Article 4(2), the Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 26 detailing the funding priorities to be reflected in the work programmes referred to in Article 17 for the duration of the CEF for eligible actions under Article 7(2). The Commission shall adopt a delegated act by 22 December 2014.
4.   The Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 26 to raise the ceiling set out in Article 14(2) up to 20 %, provided the following conditions are met:
(i)
the evaluation of the pilot phase of the Project Bond Initiative carried out in 2015 is positive; and
(ii)
the take-up of financial instruments exceeds 8 % in terms of project contractual commitments.
5.   Where it proves necessary to deviate from the allocation for a specific transport objective by more than five percentage points, the Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 26 to amend the indicative percentages set out in Part IV of Annex I.
6.   The Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 26 to modify the list of general orientations in Part V of Annex I to be taken into account when setting award criteria in order to reflect the mid-term evaluation of this Regulation or conclusions drawn from its implementation. This shall be done in a manner compatible with the respective sectoral guidelines.
