Article 8
Forms of grants and eligible costs
1.   Grants under this Regulation may take any of the forms provided for by Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012.
The work programmes referred to in Article 17 of this Regulation shall establish the forms of grants that may be used to fund the actions concerned.
2.   Without prejudice to Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012, expenditure for actions resulting from projects included in the first multiannual and annual work programmes may be eligible as from 1 January 2014.
3.   Only expenditure incurred in Member States may be eligible, except where the project of common interest involves the territory of one or more third countries and where the action is indispensable to the achievement of the objectives of the project concerned.
4.   The cost of equipment and infrastructure which is treated as capital expenditure by the beneficiary may be eligible up to its entirety.
5.   Expenditure related to environmental studies on the protection of the environment and on compliance with the relevant Union law may be eligible.
6.   Expenditure related to the purchase of land shall not be an eligible cost, except for funds transferred from the Cohesion Fund in the transport sector in accordance with a Regulation laying down common provisions on the European Regional Development Fund, the European Social Fund, the Cohesion Fund, the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development and the European Maritime and Fisheries Fund and laying down general provision on the European Regional Development Fund, the European Social Fund and the Cohesion Fund.
7.   Eligible costs shall include value added tax ("VAT") in accordance with point (c) of Article 126(3) of Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012.
As regards the amount of EUR 11 305 500 000 transferred from the Cohesion Fund to be spent in Member States eligible for funding from the Cohesion Fund, the eligibility rules concerning VAT shall be those applicable to the Cohesion Fund referred to in a Regulation laying down common provisions on the European Regional Development Fund, the European Social Fund, the Cohesion Fund, the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development and the European Maritime and Fisheries Fund and laying down general provision on the European Regional Development Fund, the European Social Fund and the Cohesion Fund.
8.   Rules on the eligibility of costs incurred by beneficiaries shall apply mutatis mutandis to costs incurred by implementing bodies.
