Article 5
Indicators
1.   Common output and result indicators, as set out in Annex I to this Regulation, and, where relevant, programme-specific indicators shall be used in accordance with Article 27(4) and Article 96(2)(b)(ii) and (iv) of Regulation (EU) No 1303/2013. All common output and result indicators shall be reported for all investment priorities. The result indicators set out in Annex II to this Regulation shall be reported in accordance with paragraph 2 of this Article. Where applicable, data shall be broken down by gender.
For common and programme-specific output indicators, baselines shall be set at zero. Where relevant to the nature of the operations supported, cumulative quantified target values for those indicators shall be set for 2023. Output indicators shall be expressed in absolute numbers.
For those common and programme-specific result indicators for which a cumulative quantified target value for 2023 has been set, baselines shall be fixed using the latest available data or other relevant sources of information. Programme-specific result indicators and related targets may be expressed in quantitative or qualitative terms.
2.   In addition to paragraph 1, result indicators set out in Annex II to this Regulation shall be used for all operations supported under the investment priority referred to in Article 3(1)(a)(ii) for the implementation of the YEI. All indicators set out in Annex II to this Regulation shall be linked with a quantified cumulative target value for 2023 and a baseline.
3.   Together with annual implementation reports, each managing authority shall transmit electronically structured data for each priority axis broken down by investment priority. The data shall be submitted for the categories of intervention referred to in Article 96(2)(b)(vi) of Regulation (EU) No 1303/2013and the output and result indicators. By way of derogation from Article 50(2) of Regulation (EU) No 1303/2013, data transmitted for output and result indicators shall relate to values for partially or fully implemented operations.
