Article 25
Committee under Article 163 TFEU
1.   The Commission shall be assisted by a Committee (the "ESF Committee") set up under Article 163 TFEU.
2.   The member of the Commission responsible for chairing the ESF Committee may delegate that responsibility to a senior Commission official. The Secretariat of the ESF Committee shall be provided by the Commission.
3.   Each Member State shall appoint one government representative, one representative of the workers' organisations, one representative of the employers' organisations and one alternate for each member for a maximum period of seven years. In the absence of a member, the alternate shall be automatically entitled to take part in the proceedings.
4.   The ESF Committee shall include one representative from each of the organisations representing workers' organisations and employers' organisations at Union level.
5.   The ESF Committee may invite non-voting representatives of the European Investment Bank and the European Investment Fund as well as non-voting representatives of the relevant civil society organizations to its meetings, if the agenda of the meeting requires their participation.
6.   The ESF Committee shall:
(a)
be consulted on draft Commission decisions relating to operational programmes and programming in the case of support from the ESF;
(b)
be consulted on the planned use of technical assistance in the case of support from the ESF, as well as on other issues having an impact on the implementation of strategies at Union level relevant to the ESF;
(c)
endorse the list of common themes for transnational cooperation provided for in Article 10(3).
7.   The ESF Committee may deliver opinions on:
(a)
questions related to the ESF contribution to the implementation of the Europe 2020 strategy;
(b)
issues concerning Regulation (EU) No 1303/2013 relevant for the ESF;
(c)
questions related to the ESF referred to it by the Commission other than those referred to in paragraph 6.
8.   The opinions of the ESF Committee shall be adopted by an absolute majority of the votes validly cast, and shall be communicated to the European Parliament for information. The Commission shall inform the ESF Committee of the manner in which it has taken account of its opinions.
