Article 1
Regulation (EEC) No 3922/91 is hereby amended as follows:
1)
the following recital shall be inserted immediately after the ninth recital:

                              ‘The application of provisions regarding flight and duty time limitations can result in significant disruption of rosters for undertakings the operating models of which are exclusively based on night-time operation. The Commission should, on the basis of evidence to be provided by the parties concerned, carry out an assessment and propose an adjustment of the provisions regarding flight and duty time limitations to take account of these special operating models.’;
2)
the following recitals shall be inserted immediately after the tenth recital:

                              ‘By 16 January 2009, the European Aviation Safety Agency should complete a scientific and medical evaluation of Subpart Q and, where relevant, of Subpart O of Annex III. On the basis of the results of this evaluation, and in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 12(2), the Commission should, if necessary, draw up and submit proposals without delay to amend the relevant technical provisions.
In the review of certain provisions referred to in Article 8a, the course towards further harmonisation of cabin crew training requirements hitherto adopted should be maintained, in order to facilitate the free movement of cabin crew personnel within the Community. In this context, the possibility of further harmonisation of cabin crew qualifications should be re-examined.’;
3)
the last recital shall be replaced by the following recital:

                              ‘The measures necessary for the implementation of this Regulation should be adopted in accordance with Council Decision 1999/468/EC of 28 June 1999 laying down the procedures for the exercise of implementing powers conferred on the Commission (*1);

(*1)  
                                    OJ L 184, 17.7.1999, p. 23. Decision as amended by Decision 2006/512/EC (OJ L 200, 22.7.2006, p. 11).’
                                 "
                        
4)
Article 1 is hereby amended as follows:
(a)
paragraph 1 shall be replaced by the following:
‘1.   This Regulation shall apply to the harmonisation of technical requirements and administrative procedures in the field of civil aviation safety related to the operation and maintenance of aircraft and persons and organisations involved in such tasks.’;
(b)
the following paragraphs shall be added:
‘3.   The application of this Regulation to the airport of Gibraltar is understood to be without prejudice to the respective legal positions of the Kingdom of Spain and the United Kingdom with regard to the dispute over sovereignty over the territory in which the airport is situated.
4.   Application of this Regulation to Gibraltar airport shall be suspended until the arrangements included in the Joint Declaration made by the Foreign Ministers of the Kingdom of Spain and the United Kingdom on 2 December 1987 enter into operation. The Governments of Spain and the United Kingdom shall inform the Council of such date of entry into operation.’;
5)
the following definition shall be added in Article 2:
‘(i)
“the Authority” in Annex III means the competent authority that has granted the air operator's certificate (AOC).’;
6)
Article 3 shall be replaced by the following:
‘Article 3
1.   Without prejudice to Article 11, the common technical requirements and administrative procedures applicable in the Community with regard to commercial transportation by aeroplane shall be those specified in Annex III.
2.   References made to Subpart M of Annex III or any of its provisions shall refer to Part-M of Commission Regulation (EC) No 2042/2003 of 20 November 2003 on the continuing airworthiness of aircraft and aeronautical products, parts and appliances, and on the approval of organisations and personnel involved in these tasks (*2) or its relevant provisions.

(*2)  
                                          OJ L 315, 28.11.2003, p. 1.’;"
                        
7)
Article 4(1) shall be replaced by the following:
‘1.   With regard to the fields not covered by Annex III, common technical requirements and administrative procedures shall be adopted on the basis of Article 80(2) of the Treaty. The Commission shall, where appropriate and as soon as possible, submit suitable proposals in these fields.’;
8)
Article 6 shall be replaced by the following:
‘Article 6
Aircraft operated under an authorisation granted by a Member State in compliance with the common technical requirements and administrative procedures may be operated under the same conditions in other Member States, without further technical requirements or evaluation by those other Member States.’;
9)
Article 7 shall be replaced by the following:
‘Article 7
Member States shall recognise the certification granted pursuant to this Regulation by another Member State or by a body acting on its behalf, to bodies or persons placed under its jurisdiction and under its authority, who are concerned with the maintenance of products and the operation of aircraft.’;
10)
Article 8 shall be replaced by the following:
‘Article 8
1.   The provisions of Articles 3 to 7 shall not prevent a Member State from reacting immediately to a safety problem which involves a product, person or organisation subject to this Regulation.
If the safety problem results from an inadequate level of safety provided for by the common technical requirements and administrative procedures, or shortcomings in these requirements and procedures, the Member State shall immediately inform the Commission and the other Member States of the measures taken and the reasons therefor.
The Commission shall decide, in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 12(2), whether an inadequate level of safety or a shortcoming in the common technical requirements and administrative procedures justifies the continued application of the measures adopted pursuant to the first subparagraph of this paragraph. In such a case, the Commission shall also take the necessary steps to amend the common technical requirements and administrative procedures concerned in accordance with Article 4 or Article 11. If the Member State's measures are found not to be justified, it shall revoke the measures in question.
2.   A Member State may grant exemptions from the technical requirements and administrative procedures specified by this Regulation in the case of unforeseen urgent operational circumstances or operational needs of a limited duration.
The Commission and the other Member States shall be informed of any exemptions granted repeatedly or for a period of more than two months.
When the Commission and other Member States are informed of exemptions granted by a Member State in accordance with the second subparagraph, the Commission shall examine whether the exemptions comply with the safety objectives of this Regulation or any other relevant rule of Community legislation.
If the Commission finds that the exemptions granted do not comply with the safety objectives of this Regulation or any other relevant rule of Community legislation, it shall decide on safeguard measures in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 12a.
In such a case, the Member State concerned shall revoke the exemption.
3.   In cases where a safety level equivalent to that attained by the application of the common technical requirements and administrative procedures set out in Annex III can be achieved by other means, Member States may, without discrimination on grounds of the nationality of the applicants and having regard to the need not to distort competition, grant approval derogating from these provisions.
In such cases the Member State concerned shall notify the Commission of its intention to grant such approval, the reasons therefor and the conditions laid down in order to ensure that an equivalent level of safety is achieved.
The Commission shall, within a period of three months following notification by a Member State, initiate the procedure referred to in Article 12(2) in order to decide whether the proposed approval of the measure can be granted.
In such a case, the Commission shall notify its decision to all Member States, which shall be entitled to apply that measure. The relevant provisions of Annex III may also be amended to reflect such a measure.
Articles 6 and 7 shall apply to the measure in question.
4.   Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3, a Member State may adopt or maintain provisions relating to OPS 1.1105 point 6, OPS 1.1110 points 1.3 and 1.4.1, OPS 1.1115, and OPS 1.1125 point 2.1 of Subpart Q in Annex III until Community rules based on scientific knowledge and best practices are established.
A Member State shall inform the Commission of the provisions that it decides to maintain.
For national provisions derogating from the OPS 1 provisions referred to in the first subparagraph, which Member States intend to adopt after the date of application of Annex III, the Commission shall, within a period of three months following the notification by a Member State, initiate the procedure referred to in Article 12(2) in order to decide whether these provisions comply with the safety objectives of this Regulation and other rules of Community law, and if they may be made applicable.
If so, the Commission shall notify its decision to approve the measure to all Member States, which shall be entitled to apply the measure. The relevant provisions of Annex III may also be amended to reflect such a measure.
Articles 6 and 7 shall apply to the measure in question.’;
11)
the following Article shall be inserted:
‘Article 8a
1.   By 16 January 2009, the European Aviation Safety Agency shall conclude a scientific and medical evaluation of the provisions of Subpart Q and, where relevant, of Subpart O of Annex III.
2.   Without prejudice to Article 7 of Regulation (EC) No 1592/2002 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 July 2002 on common rules in the field of civil aviation and establishing a European Aviation Safety Agency (*3), the European Aviation Safety Agency shall assist the Commission in the preparation of proposals for the modification of the applicable technical provisions of Subpart O and Subpart Q of Annex III.

(*3)  
                                          OJ L 240, 7.9.2002, p. 1. Regulation as last amended by Commission Regulation (EC) No 1701/2003 (OJ L 243, 27.9.2003, p. 5).’;"
                        
12)
Article 11(1) shall be replaced by the following:
‘1.   The Commission, following the procedure referred to in Article 12(2), shall make the amendments necessitated by scientific and technical progress to the common technical requirements and administrative procedures listed in Annex III.’;
13)
Article 12 shall be replaced by the following:
‘Article 12
1.   The Commission shall be assisted by the Air Safety Committee, hereinafter referred to as the Committee.
2.   Where reference is made to this paragraph, Articles 5 and 7 of Decision 1999/468/EC shall apply, having regard to the provisions of Article 8 thereof.
The period laid down in Article 5(6) of Decision 1999/468/EC shall be set at three months.
3.   The Committee shall adopt its Rules of Procedure.’
14)
the following Article shall be inserted:
‘Article 12a
Where reference is made to this Article, the safeguard procedure laid down in Article 6 of Decision 1999/468/EC shall apply.
Before adopting its decision, the Commission shall consult the Committee.
The period provided for in Article 6(b) of Decision 1999/468/EC shall be set at three months.
When a Commission decision is referred to the Council by a Member State, the Council, acting by a qualified majority, may take a different decision within a period of three months.’;
15)
the text appearing in the Annex to this Regulation shall be added as Annex III.
