Article 52
Reports and review
1.   By 3 March 2019, the Commission shall, after consulting ESMA, submit a report to the European Parliament and to the Council on the impact in practice of the transparency obligations established pursuant to Articles 3 to 13, in particular on the impact of the volume cap mechanism described in Article 5, including on the cost of trading for eligible counterparties and professional clients and on trading of shares of small and mid-cap companies, and its effectiveness in ensuring that the use of the relevant waivers does not harm price formation and how any appropriate mechanism for imposing sanctions for infringements of the volume cap might operate, and on the application and continued appropriateness of the waivers to pre-trade transparency obligations established pursuant to Article 4(2) and (3) and Article 9(2) to (5).
2.   The report referred to in paragraph 1 shall include the impact on European equity markets of the use of the waiver under Article 4(1)(a) and (b)(i) and the volume cap mechanism under Article 5, with particular reference to:
(a)
the level and trend of non-lit order book trading within the Union since the introduction of this Regulation;
(b)
the impact on the pre-trade transparent quoted spreads;
(c)
the impact on the depth of liquidity on lit order books;
(d)
the impact on competition and on investors within the Union;
(e)
the impact on trading of shares of small and mid-cap companies;
(f)
developments at international level and discussions with third countries and international organisations.
3.   If the report concludes that the use of the waiver under Article 4(1)(a) and (b)(i) is harmful to price formation or to trading of shares of small and mid-cap companies, the Commission shall, where appropriate, make proposals, including amendments to this Regulation, regarding the use of those waivers. Such proposals shall include an impact assessment of the proposed amendments, and shall take into account the objectives of this Regulation and the effects on market disruption and competition, and potential impacts on investors in the Union.
4.   By 3 March 2019, the Commission shall, after consulting ESMA, submit a report to the European Parliament and to the Council on the functioning of Article 26, including whether the content and format of transaction reports received and exchanged between competent authorities comprehensively enable to monitor the activities of investment firms in accordance with Article 26(1). The Commission may make any appropriate proposals, including providing for transactions to be reported to a system appointed by ESMA instead of to competent authorities, which allows relevant competent authorities to access all the information reported pursuant to this Article for the purposes of this Regulation and of Directive 2014/65/EU and the detection of insider dealing and market abuse in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 596/2014.
5.   By 3 March 2019, the Commission shall, after consulting ESMA, submit a report to the European Parliament and to the Council on appropriate solutions to reduce information asymmetries between market participants as well as tools for regulators to better monitor quotation activities on trading venues. That report shall at least assess the feasibility of developing a European best bid and offer system for consolidated quotes to fulfil those objectives.
6.   By 3 March 2019, the Commission shall, after consulting ESMA, submit a report to the European Parliament and to the Council on the progress made in moving trading in standardised OTC derivatives to exchanges or electronic trading platforms pursuant to Articles 25 and 28.
7.   By 3 July 2019, the Commission shall, after consulting ESMA, submit a report to the European Parliament and to the Council on the development in prices for pre-trade and post-trade transparency data from regulated markets, MTFs, OTFs, APAs and CTPs.
8.   By 3 July 2019, the Commission shall, after consulting ESMA, submit a report to the European Parliament and to the Council reviewing the interoperability provisions in Article 36 of this Regulation and of Article 8 of Regulation (EU) No 648/2012.
9.   By 3 July 2019, the Commission shall, after consulting ESMA, submit a report to the European Parliament and to the Council on the application of Articles 35 and 36 of this Regulation and of Articles 7 and 8 of Regulation (EU) No 648/2012.
By 3 July 2021, the Commission shall, after consulting ESMA, submit a report to the European Parliament and to the Council on the application of Article 37.
10.   By 3 July 2019, the Commission shall, after consulting ESMA, submit a report to the European Parliament and to the Council on the impact of Article 35 and 36 of this Regulation on newly established and authorised CCPs as referred to in Article 35(5) and trading venues connected to those CCPs by close links and whether the transitional arrangement provided for in Article 35(5) shall be extended, weighing the possible benefits to consumers of improving competition and the degree of choice available to market participants against the possible disproportionate effect of those provisions on newly established and authorised CCPs and the constraints of local market participants in accessing global CCPs and the smooth functioning of the market.
Subject to the conclusions of that report, the Commission may adopt a delegated act in accordance with Article 50 to extend the transitional period in accordance with Article 35(5) by a maximum of 30 months.
11.   By 3 July 2019, the Commission shall, after consulting ESMA, submit a report to the European Parliament and to the Council on whether the threshold laid down in Article 36(5) remains appropriate and whether the opt out mechanism in respect of exchange-traded derivatives is to remain available.
12.   By 3 July 2016, the Commission shall, based on a risk assessment carried out by ESMA in consultation with the ESRB, submit a report to the European Parliament and to the Council assessing the need to temporarily exclude exchange-traded derivatives from the scope of Article 35 and 36. That report shall take into account risks, if any, resulting from open access provisions regarding exchange-traded derivatives to the overall stability and orderly functioning of the financial markets throughout the Union.
Subject to the conclusions of that report, the Commission may adopt a delegated act in accordance with Article 50 to exclude exchange-traded derivatives from the scope of Articles 35 and 36 for up to thirty months following 3 January 2017.
