Article 5
Volume Cap Mechanism
1.   In order to ensure that the use of the waivers provided for in Article 4(1)(a) and 4(1)(b)(i) does not unduly harm price formation, trading under those waivers is restricted as follows:
(a)
the percentage of trading in a financial instrument carried out on a trading venue under those waivers shall be limited to 4 % of the total volume of trading in that financial instrument on all trading venues across the Union over the previous 12 months.
(b)
overall Union trading in a financial instrument carried out under those waivers shall be limited to 8 % of the total volume of trading in that financial instrument on all trading venues across the Union over the previous 12 months.
That volume cap mechanism shall not apply to negotiated transactions which are in a share, depositary receipt, ETF, certificate or other similar financial instrument for which there is not a liquid market as determined in accordance with Article 2(1)(17)(b) and are dealt within a percentage of a suitable reference price as referred to in Article 4(1)(b)(ii), or to negotiated transactions that are subject to conditions other than the current market price of that financial instrument as referred to in Article 4(1)(b)(iii).
2.   When the percentage of trading in a financial instrument carried out on a trading venue under the waivers has exceeded the limit referred to in paragraph 1(a), the competent authority that authorised the use of those waivers by that venue shall within two working days suspend their use on that venue in that financial instrument based on the data published by ESMA referred to in paragraph 4, for a period of six months.
3.   When the percentage of trading in a financial instrument carried out on all trading venues across the Union under those waivers has exceeded the limit referred to in paragraph 1(b), all competent authorities shall within two working days suspend the use of those waivers across the Union for a period of six months.
4.   ESMA shall publish within five working days of the end of each calendar month, the total volume of Union trading per financial instrument in the previous 12 months, the percentage of trading in a financial instrument carried out across the Union under those waivers and on each trading venue in the previous 12 months, and the methodology that is used to derive those percentages.
5.   In the event that the report referred to in paragraph 4 identifies any trading venue where trading in any financial instrument carried out under the waivers has exceeded 3,75 % of the total trading in the Union in that financial instrument, based on the previous 12 months’ trading, ESMA shall publish an additional report within five working days of the 15th day of the calendar month in which the report referred to in paragraph 4 is published. That report shall contain the information specified in paragraph 4 in respect of those financial instruments where 3,75 % has been exceeded.
6.   In the event that the report referred to in paragraph 4 identifies that overall Union trading in any financial instrument carried out under the waivers has exceeded 7,75 % of the total Union trading in the financial instrument, based on the previous 12 months’ trading, ESMA shall publish an additional report within five working days of the 15th on the day of the calendar month in which the report referred to in paragraph 4 is published. That report shall contain the information specified in paragraph 4 in respect of those financial instruments where 7,75 % has been exceeded.
7.   In order to ensure a reliable basis for monitoring the trading taking place under those waivers and for determining whether the limits referred to in paragraph 1 have been exceeded, operators of trading venues shall be obligated to have in place systems and procedures to:
(a)
enable the identification of all trades which have taken place on its venue under those waivers; and
(b)
ensure it does not exceed the permitted percentage of trading allowed under those waivers as referred to in paragraph 1(a) under any circumstances.
8.   The period for the publication of trading data by ESMA, and for which trading in a financial instrument under those waivers is to be monitored shall start on 3 January 2016. Without prejudice to Article 4(5), competent authorities shall be empowered to suspend the use of those waivers from the date of application of this Regulation and thereafter on a monthly basis.
9.   ESMA shall develop draft regulatory technical standards to specify the method, including the flagging of transactions, by which it collates, calculates and publishes the transaction data, as outlined in paragraph 4, in order to provide an accurate measurement of the total volume of trading per financial instrument and the percentages of trading that use those waivers across the Union and per trading venue.
ESMA shall submit those draft regulatory technical standards to the Commission by 3 July 2015.
Power is delegated to the Commission to adopt the regulatory technical standards referred to in the first subparagraph in accordance with Articles 10 to 14 of Regulation (EU) No 1095/2010.
