Article 36
Non-discriminatory access to a trading venue
1.   Without prejudice to Article 8 of Regulation (EU) No 648/2012, a trading venue shall provide trade feeds on a non-discriminatory and transparent basis, including as regards fees related to access, upon request to any CCP authorised or recognised by Regulation (EU) No 648/2012 that wishes to clear transactions in financial instruments that are concluded on that trading venue. That requirement does not apply to any derivative contract that is already subject to the access obligations under Article 8 of Regulation (EU) No 648/2012.
A trading venue is not bound by this Article if it is connected by close links to a CCP which has given notification that it is availing of the transitional arrangements under Article 35(5).
2.   A request to access a trading venue by a CCP shall be formally submitted to a trading venue, its relevant competent authority and the competent authority of the CCP.
3.   The trading venue shall provide a written response to the CCP within three months in the case of transferable securities and money market instruments, and within six months in the case of exchange-traded derivatives, either permitting access, under the condition that the relevant competent authority has granted access pursuant to paragraph 4, or denying access. The trading venue may deny access only under the conditions specified under paragraph 6(a). When access is denied the trading venue shall provide full reasons in its response and inform its competent authority in writing of the decision. Where the CCP is established in a different Member State to the trading venue, the trading venue shall also provide such notification and reasoning to the competent authority of the CCP. The trading venue shall make access possible within three months of providing a positive response to the access request.
4.   The competent authority of the trading venue or that of the CCP shall grant a CCP access to a trading venue only where such access:
(a)
would not require an interoperability arrangement, in the case of derivatives that are not OTC derivatives pursuant to Article 2(7) of Regulation (EU) No 648/2012; or
(b)
would not threaten the smooth and orderly functioning of the markets, in particular due to liquidity fragmentation and the trading venue has put in place adequate mechanisms to prevent such fragmentation, or would not adversely affect systemic risk.
Nothing in point (a) of the first subparagraph shall prevent access being granted where the request referred to in paragraph 2 requires interoperability and the trading venue and all CCPs party to the proposed interoperability arrangement have consented to the arrangement and the risks to which the incumbent CCP is exposed to arising from inter-CCP positions are collateralised at a third party.
Where the need for an interoperability arrangement is the reason or is part of the reason for denying a request, the trading venue will advise the CCP and inform ESMA which other CCPs have access to the trading venue and ESMA will publish that information so that investment firms may choose to exercise their rights under Article 37 of Directive 2014/65/EU in respect of those CCPs in order to facilitate alternative access arrangements.
If a competent authority denies access it shall issue its decision within two months following receipt of the request referred to in paragraph 2 and provide full reasons to the other competent authority, the trading venue and the CCP including the evidence on which its decision is based.
5.   As regards exchange-traded derivatives, a trading venue which falls below the relevant threshold in the calendar year preceding the entry into application of this Regulation, may, before the entry into application of this Regulation, notify ESMA and its competent authority that it does not wish to be bound by this Article for exchange-traded derivatives included within that threshold, for a period of thirty months from the application of this Regulation. A trading venue which remains below the relevant threshold in every year of that, or any further, thirty month period may, at the end of the period, notify ESMA and its competent authority that it wishes to continue to not be bound by this Article for further thirty months. Where notification is given the trading venue cannot benefit from the access rights under Article 35 or this Article for exchange-traded derivatives included within the relevant threshold, for the duration of the opt-out. ESMA shall publish a list of all notifications that it receives.
The relevant threshold for the opt-out is an annual notional amount traded of EUR 1 000 000 million. The notional amount shall be single-counted and shall include all transactions in exchange-traded derivatives concluded under the rules of the trading venue.
Where a trading venue is part of a group which is connected by close links, the threshold shall be calculated by adding the annual notional amount traded of all the trading venues in the group as a whole that are based in the Union.
Where a trading venue which has made a notification under this paragraph is connected by close links to one or more CCPs, those CCPs shall not benefit from access rights under Article 35 or this Article for exchange-traded derivatives within the relevant threshold, for the duration of the opt-out.
6.   ESMA shall develop draft regulatory technical standards to specify:
(a)
the specific conditions under which an access request may be denied by a trading venue, including conditions based on the anticipated volume of transactions, the number of users, arrangements for managing operational risk and complexity or other factors creating significant undue risks;
(b)
the conditions under which access shall be granted, including confidentiality of information provided regarding financial instruments during the development phase and the non-discriminatory and transparent basis as regards fees related to access;
(c)
the conditions under which granting access will threaten the smooth and orderly functioning of the markets, or would adversely affect systemic risk;
(d)
the procedure for making a notification under paragraph 5, including further specifications for calculation of the notional amount and the method by which ESMA may verify the calculation of the volumes and approve the opt-out.
ESMA shall submit those draft regulatory technical standards to the Commission by 3 July 2015.
Power is delegated to the Commission to adopt the regulatory technical standards referred to in the first subparagraph in accordance with Articles 10 to 14 of Regulation (EU) No 1095/2010.
