Article 25
Obligation to maintain records
1.   Investment firms shall keep at the disposal of the competent authority, for five years, the relevant data relating to all orders and all transactions in financial instruments which they have carried out, whether on own account or on behalf of a client. In the case of transactions carried out on behalf of clients, the records shall contain all the information and details of the identity of the client, and the information required under Directive 2005/60/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (27). ESMA may request access to that information in accordance with the procedure and under the conditions set out in Article 35 of Regulation (EU) No 1095/2010.
2.   The operator of a trading venue shall keep at the disposal of the competent authority, for at least five years, the relevant data relating to all orders in financial instruments which are advertised through their systems. The records shall contain the relevant data that constitute the characteristics of the order, including those that link an order with the executed transaction(s) that stems from that order and the details of which shall be reported in accordance with Article 26(1) and (3). ESMA shall perform a facilitation and coordination role in relation to the access by competent authorities to information under this paragraph.
3.   ESMA shall develop draft regulatory technical standards to specify the details of the relevant order data required to be maintained under paragraph 2 of this Article that is not referred to in Article 26.
Those draft regulatory technical standards shall include the identification code of the member or participant which transmitted the order, the identification code of the order, the date and time the order was transmitted, the characteristics of the order, including the type of order, the limit price if applicable, the validity period, any specific order instructions, details of any modification, cancellation, partial or full execution of the order, the agency or principal capacity.
ESMA shall submit those draft regulatory technical standards to the Commission by 3 July 2015.
Power is delegated to the Commission to adopt the regulatory technical standards referred to in the first subparagraph in accordance with Articles 10 to 14 of Regulation (EU) No 1095/2010.
