Article 35
Non-discriminatory access to a CCP
1.   Without prejudice to Article 7 of Regulation (EU) No 648/2012, a CCP shall accept to clear financial instruments on a non-discriminatory and transparent basis, including as regards collateral requirements and fees relating to access, regardless of the trading venue on which a transaction is executed. This in particular shall ensure that a trading venue has the right to non-discriminatory treatment of contracts traded on that trading venue in terms of:
(a)
collateral requirements and netting of economically equivalent contracts, where the inclusion of such contracts in the close-out and other netting procedures of a CCP based on the applicable insolvency law would not endanger the smooth and orderly functioning, the validity or enforceability of such procedures; and
(b)
cross-margining with correlated contracts cleared by the same CCP under a risk model that complies with Article 41 of Regulation (EU) No 648/2012.
A CCP may require that the trading venue comply with the operational and technical requirements established by the CCP including the risk management requirements. The requirement in this paragraph does not apply to any derivative contract that is already subject to the access obligations under Article 7 of Regulation (EU) No 648/2012.
A CCP is not bound by this Article if it is connected by close links to a trading venue which has given notification under Article 36(5).
2.   A request to access a CCP by a trading venue shall be formally submitted to a CCP, its relevant competent authority and the competent authority of the trading venue. The request shall specify to which types of financial instruments access is requested.
3.   The CCP shall provide a written response to the trading venue within three months in the case of transferable securities and money market instruments, and within six months in the case of exchange-traded derivatives, either permitting access, under the condition that a relevant competent authority has granted access pursuant to paragraph 4, or denying access. The CCP may deny a request for access only under the conditions specified in paragraph 6(a). If a CCP denies access it shall provide full reasons in its response and inform its competent authority in writing of the decision. Where the trading venue is established in a different Member State to the CCP, the CCP shall also provide such notification and reasoning to the competent authority of the trading venue. The CCP shall make access possible within three months of providing a positive response to the access request.
4.   The competent authority of the CCP or that of the trading venue shall grant a trading venue access to a CCP only where such access:
(a)
would not require an interoperability arrangement, in the case of derivatives that are not OTC derivatives pursuant to Article 2(7) of Regulation (EU) No 648/2012; or
(b)
would not threaten the smooth and orderly functioning of the markets, in particular due to liquidity fragmentation, or would not adversely affect systemic risk.
Nothing in point (a) of the first subparagraph shall prevent access being granted where the request referred to in paragraph 2 requires interoperability and the trading venue and all CCPs party to the proposed interoperability arrangement have consented to the arrangement and the risks to which the incumbent CCP is exposed to arising from inter-CCP positions are collateralised at a third party.
Where the need for an interoperability arrangement is the reason or is part of the reason for denying a request, the trading venue will advise the CCP and inform ESMA which other CCPs have access to the trading venue and ESMA will publish that information so that investment firms may choose to exercise their rights under Article 37 of Directive 2014/65/EU in respect of those CCPs in order to facilitate alternative access arrangements.
If a competent authority refuses access it shall issue its decision within two months following receipt of the request referred to in paragraph 2 and provide full reasons to the other competent authority, the CCP and the trading venue including the evidence on which the decision is based.
5.   As regards transferable securities and money market instruments, a CCP that has been newly established and authorised as a CCP as defined in Article 2(1) of Regulation (EU) No 648/2012 to clear under Article 17 of Regulation (EU) No 648/2012 or recognised under Article 25 of Regulation (EU) No 648/2012 or authorised under a pre-existing national authorisation regime for a period of less than three years on 2 July 2014 may, before 3 January 2017, apply to its competent authority for permission to avail itself of transitional arrangements. The competent authority may decide that this Article does not apply to the CCP in respect of transferable securities and money market instruments, for a transitional period until 3 July 2019.
Where such a transitional period is approved, the CCP cannot benefit from the access rights under Article 36 or this Article in respect of transferable securities and money market instruments for the duration of that transitional arrangement. The competent authority shall notify members of the college of competent authorities for the CCP and ESMA when a transitional period is approved. ESMA shall publish a list of all notifications that it receives.
Where a CCP which has been approved for the transitional arrangements under this paragraph is connected by close links to one or more trading venues, those trading venues shall not benefit from access rights under Article 36 or this Article in respect of transferable securities and money market instruments for the duration of the transitional arrangement.
A CCP which is authorised during the three year period prior to entry into force, but is formed by a merger or acquisition involving at least one CCP authorised prior to that period, shall not be permitted to apply for the transitional arrangements under this paragraph.
6.   ESMA shall develop draft regulatory technical standards to specify:
(a)
the specific conditions under which an access request may be denied by a CCP, including the anticipated volume of transactions, the number and type of users, arrangements for managing operational risk and complexity or other factors creating significant undue risks;
(b)
the conditions under which access must be permitted by a CCP, including confidentiality of information provided regarding financial instruments during the development phase, the non-discriminatory and transparent basis as regards clearing fees, collateral requirements and operational requirements regarding margining;
(c)
the conditions under which granting access will threaten the smooth and orderly functioning of markets or would adversely affect systemic risk;
(d)
the procedure for making a notification under paragraph 5;
(e)
the conditions for non-discriminatory treatment in terms of how contracts traded on that trading venue are treated in terms of collateral requirements and netting of economically equivalent contracts and cross-margining with correlated contracts cleared by the same CCP.
ESMA shall submit those draft regulatory technical standards to the Commission by 3 July 2015.
Power is delegated to the Commission to adopt the regulatory technical standards referred to in the first subparagraph in accordance with Articles 10 to 14 of Regulation (EU) No 1095/2010.
