Whereas:
(1)
Directive 2003/87/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (4) established a system for greenhouse gas emission allowance trading within the Union, in order to promote reductions of greenhouse gas emissions in a cost-effective and economically efficient manner. Aviation activities were included in the EU Emissions Trading System (EU ETS) by Directive 2008/101/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (5). The European Union has competence to extend the EU ETS to all flights which depart from or arrive at an aerodrome located in a Member State.
(2)
Protection of the environment is one of the most important challenges facing the Union and the rest of the world. The Paris Agreement (6), adopted on 12 December 2015 under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) (the ‘Paris Agreement’), entered into force on 4 November 2016. The Parties to the Paris Agreement have agreed to hold the increase in the global average temperature well below 2 °C above pre-industrial levels and to pursue efforts to limit the temperature increase to 1,5 °C above pre-industrial levels. That commitment has been reinforced with the adoption under the UNFCCC of the Glasgow Climate Pact on 13 November 2021, in which the Conference of the Parties to the UNFCCC serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement, recognises that keeping the increase in the global average temperature to 1,5 °C above pre-industrial levels would significantly reduce the risks and impacts of climate change, and those Parties committed to strengthen their 2030 targets by the end of 2022 in order to accelerate climate action in this critical decade and to close the ambition gap with the 1,5 °C target. In order to achieve the goals of the Paris Agreement, all sectors of the economy, including international aviation, need to contribute to achieving greenhouse gas emission reductions.
(3)
Aviation accounts for 2 to 3 % of global CO2 emissions and aviation’s total climate impact is at least twice its impact from CO2 alone. Aviation is the second biggest source of transport climate impacts after road transport. In 2022, Eurocontrol projected an increase in European aviation activity of 44 % by 2050 compared to 2019. The need for action to reduce CO2 emissions is becoming increasingly urgent, as stated by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change in its latest reports of 7 August 2021 entitled ‘Climate change 2021: The Physical Science Basis’, of 28 February 2022 entitled ‘Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability’, and of 4 April 2022 entitled ‘Climate Change 2022: Mitigation of Climate Change’. That report of 4 April 2022 identifies international aviation as a sector where sectoral agreements have adopted climate mitigation goals that fall far short of what would be required to achieve the long-term temperature goal of the Paris Agreement. The Union should therefore address that urgent need for action by stepping up its efforts and establishing itself as an international leader in the fight against climate change.
(4)
On 27 June 2018, at the tenth meeting of its 214th session, the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) Council adopted the First Edition of Annex 16, Volume IV, to the Convention on International Civil Aviation signed on 7 December 1944 (the ‘Chicago Convention’) – Carbon Offsetting and Reduction Scheme for International Aviation (CORSIA), establishing the International Standards and Recommended Practices on Environmental Protection for CORSIA (CORSIA SARPs). The Union and its Member States are implementing CORSIA from the start of the pilot phase 2021-2023 in accordance with Council Decision (EU) 2020/954 (7).
(5)
In line with Council Decision (EU) 2018/2027 (8), Member States notified the ICAO Secretariat of differences between CORSIA and the EU ETS. The objective was to preserve the Union acquis and future policy prerogatives, as well as the Union level of climate ambition and the exclusive roles of the European Parliament and Council in deciding the contents of Union law. Following the adoption of this Directive, the notification of differences between CORSIA and the EU ETS to the ICAO Secretariat should be updated by a second notification of differences consistent with Union law to reflect the revisions made to Directive 2003/87/EC.
(6)
Tackling climate- and environmental-related challenges and reaching the goals of the Paris Agreement are at the core of the communication of the Commission of 11 December 2019 entitled ‘The European Green Deal’ (the ‘European Green Deal’).
(7)
The Union committed to reducing its economy-wide net greenhouse gas emissions by at least 55 % compared to 1990 levels by 2030 in the updated nationally determined contribution of the Union and its Member States submitted to the UNFCCC Secretariat on 17 December 2020. Aviation should contribute to those emission reduction efforts.
(8)
Through the adoption of Regulation (EU) 2021/1119 of the European Parliament and of the Council (9), the Union has enshrined in legislation the objective of reducing emissions to net zero at the latest by 2050 and the aim of achieving negative emissions thereafter. That Regulation also establishes a binding Union intermediate domestic reduction climate target for net greenhouse gas emissions (emissions after deduction of removals) of at least 55 % compared to 1990 levels by 2030.
(9)
Amendments introduced by this Directive are essential to ensuring the integrity of the EU ETS and effectively steering the EU ETS in order for it to contribute, as a policy tool, to achieving the Union’s objectives of reducing net greenhouse gas emissions by at least 55 % by 2030 and becoming climate-neutral by 2050, at the latest, as well as the aim of achieving negative emissions thereafter as laid down in Article 2(1) of Regulation (EU) 2021/1119. Those amendments are therefore also aimed at the implementation of the Union’s contributions under the Paris Agreement as regards aviation. Therefore, the total quantity of allowances for aviation should be consolidated and subject to the linear reduction factor as referred to in Article 9 of Directive 2003/87/EC.
(10)
In addition to CO2, aviation affects the climate through non-CO2 emissions such as oxides of nitrogen (NOx), soot particles, oxidised sulphur species, and effects from water vapour, as well as through atmospheric processes caused by such emissions, for example the formation of ozone and contrail cirrus. The climate impact of such non-CO2 emissions depends on the type of fuel and engines used, on the location of the emissions, in particular the cruise altitude of the aircraft, and its position in terms of latitude and longitude, as well as the time of the emissions and the weather conditions at that time. Based upon the Commission’s impact assessment of 2006 on the inclusion of aviation in the EU ETS, Directive 2008/101/EC recognised that aviation has an impact on the global climate through the release of non-CO2 emissions. Article 30(4) of Directive 2003/87/EC, as amended by Directive (EU) 2018/410 of the European Parliament and of the Council (10), required the Commission to present an updated analysis of the non-CO2 effects of aviation, accompanied, where appropriate, by a proposal on how best to address those effects, before 1 January 2020. To fulfil that requirement, the European Union Aviation Safety Agency (EASA) conducted an updated analysis of the non-CO2 effects of aviation on climate change and published its study on 23 November 2020. The findings of that study confirmed what had been previously estimated, namely that the non-CO2 climate impacts of aviation activities are, in total, at least as significant as those of CO2 alone.
(11)
It follows from the findings of the EASA’s study of 23 November 2020 that non-CO2 aviation effects, in line with the precautionary principle, can no longer be ignored. Union regulatory measures are needed to achieve reductions of emissions in line with the Paris Agreement. Therefore, the Commission should set up a monitoring, reporting and verification framework for non-CO2 aviation effects. Building on the results of that framework, by 1 January 2028, the Commission should submit a report, and, where appropriate and based on an impact assessment, submit a legislative proposal containing mitigation measures for non-CO2 aviation effects, by expanding the scope of the EU ETS to cover such effects.
(12)
Achieving the increased climate ambition will require channelling as many resources as possible to the climate transition, which should also be a just transition. As a result, all auction revenues that are not attributed to the Union budget should be used for climate-related purposes.
(13)
The total quantity of allowances for aviation should be consolidated at the level of allocation for flights for which allowances have to be surrendered in accordance with Directive 2003/87/EC. The allocation for the year 2024 should be based on the total allocation to active aircraft operators in the year 2023, reduced by the linear reduction factor as referred to in that Directive. The level of allocation should be increased to take into account the routes that were not covered by the EU ETS in the year 2023 but will be covered by the EU ETS from the year 2024 onwards.
(14)
An increased share of auctioning from the year after the entry into force of this Directive should be the rule for the allocation of allowances for the aviation sector, taking into account the sector’s ability to pass on the increased cost of CO2. A gradual phase out of free allocation in 2024 and 2025 and full auctioning from 2026 should be implemented.
(15)
Directive 2003/87/EC should contribute to incentivising the decarbonisation of commercial air transport. The transition from the use of fossil fuels would play a role in achieving such decarbonisation. However, considering the high level of competition between aircraft operators, the developing Union market for sustainable aviation fuels, and the significant price differential between fossil kerosene and sustainable aviation fuels, that transition should be supported by incentivising early movers. Therefore, during the period from 1 January 2024 until 31 December 2030, 20 million allowances should be reserved in order to be allocated to cover part of the remaining price differential between fossil kerosene and the eligible aviation fuels for individual aircraft operators. Those allowances should come from the pool of total allowances available for aviation and should be allocated, in a non-discriminatory manner, only for flights covered by the surrender obligation of Directive 2003/87/EC. Following an evaluation of the functioning of that reserve, the Commission could decide to submit a legislative proposal to allocate a capped and time-limited amount of allowances. Such allocation should only last until 31 December 2034.
(16)
Supersonic commercial flights ceased to be available, inter alia, due to the disproportionally elevated environmental damage they caused. Nevertheless, current trends show intensive research into the re-introduction of supersonic aviation. The positive correlation between the speed of travel and the level of emissions due to fuel burn justifies treating subsonic flights differently from supersonic flights. Therefore, it is appropriate to exclude possible future supersonic flights from the support provided under this Directive for non-fossil fuels.
(17)
Directive 2003/87/EC should also be amended with regard to acceptable units for compliance, to take into account the CORSIA Emissions Unit Eligibility Criteria adopted by the ICAO Council at its 216th session in March 2019 as an essential element of CORSIA. Aircraft operators based in the Union should be able to use units for compliance with CORSIA for flights to or from, or between, third countries that are considered to be participating in CORSIA. To ensure that the Union’s CORSIA implementation supports the Paris Agreement goals and gives incentives for broad participation in CORSIA, the units for compliance should originate from States that are Parties to the Paris Agreement and that participate in CORSIA, and double counting should be avoided.
(18)
In order to ensure uniform conditions for the use of units in accordance with Directive 2003/87/EC, implementing powers should be conferred on the Commission to adopt a list of units building on those which have been considered acceptable by the ICAO Council to use for compliance with CORSIA, and that fulfil the eligibility conditions provided for by this Directive. Those powers should be exercised in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council (11).
(19)
In order to ensure uniform conditions for the necessary arrangements for authorisation by the participating parties, for timely adjustments to the reporting of anthropogenic emissions by sources and removals by sinks covered by the nationally determined contributions of the participating parties, and for avoidance of double counting and a net increase in global emissions, implementing powers should be conferred on the Commission to lay down detailed requirements for such arrangements. Those powers should be exercised in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 182/2011.
(20)
In order to ensure uniform conditions for the calculation of the offsetting requirements for CORSIA for aircraft operators based in the Union, the corresponding implementing powers should be conferred on the Commission. Those powers should be exercised in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 182/2011.
(21)
As CORSIA implementation and enforcement for aircraft operators based outside the Union is meant to be solely the responsibility of the home country of those aircraft operators, aircraft operators based outside the Union should not be required to cancel units for compliance with CORSIA under this Directive.
(22)
As CORSIA implementation and enforcement for aircraft operators based outside the Union is meant to be solely the responsibility of the home country of those aircraft operators, where an aircraft operator based outside the Union has significant emissions from flights within the European Economic Area (EEA), or departing from an aerodrome located in the EEA to an aerodrome located in Switzerland or in the United Kingdom, the State in which that aircraft operator is based can also notify differences regarding the application of CORSIA in respect of intra-European flights. Directive 2003/87/EC should be kept under review in light of developments in that regard.
(23)
To ensure equal treatment on routes, flights to and from States that are not implementing CORSIA for the purposes of Union law other than flights departing from an aerodrome located in the EEA and arriving at an aerodrome located in the EEA, in Switzerland or in the United Kingdom should be exempt from obligations to surrender allowances or to cancel units. To incentivise full implementation of CORSIA starting in 2027, the exemption should only apply to emissions released until 31 December 2026 in relation to the surrender of allowances.
(24)
Article 191 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU) provides that Union policy on the environment is to contribute to promoting measures at international level combating climate change and requires the Union and the Member States, within their respective spheres of competence, to cooperate with third countries and with the competent international organisations. Those objectives are also relevant for ICAO and the further development of CORSIA.
(25)
Data transparency and public access to information are essential to improve accountability and enforceability. Therefore, the Commission should publish in a user-friendly manner data on aircraft operators’ emissions and offsetting. Such publication would facilitate assessing the impact of CORSIA on the global reduction of CO2 emissions and its role in achieving the goals of the Paris Agreement.
(26)
Flights to and from least developed countries and small island developing States, as defined by the United Nations, not implementing CORSIA, for the purposes of Union law, other than those States whose GDP per capita equals or exceeds the Union average, should be exempt from obligations to surrender allowances or to cancel units. There should be no end date for that exemption.
(27)
In order to ensure uniform conditions for exempting aircraft operators from offsetting requirements as laid down under this Directive in respect of emissions from flights to and from States applying CORSIA in a less stringent manner in its domestic law, or failing to enforce CORSIA provisions in a manner equal to all aircraft operators pursuant to this Directive, implementing powers should be conferred on the Commission to exempt aircraft operators based in the Union from offsetting requirements in respect of emissions from flights where a significant distortion of competition to the detriment of aircraft operators based in the Union occurs due to a less stringent implementation or enforcement of CORSIA in third countries. The distortion of competition could be caused by a less stringent approach to eligible units or double counting provisions. Those powers should be exercised in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 182/2011.
(28)
In order to ensure uniform conditions for the establishment of a level playing field on routes between two different States applying CORSIA where those States allow aircraft operators to use units other than those on the list of units for compliance adopted pursuant to an implementing act under this Directive, implementing powers should be conferred on the Commission to allow aircraft operators based in a Member State to use unit types additional to that list of units for compliance or not to be bound by the conditions for eligibility of units introduced by this Directive. Those powers should be exercised in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 182/2011.
(29)
The Commission should report on the implementation of CORSIA and of ICAO’s basket of measures to meet the long-term global aspirational goal for international aviation of net-zero carbon emissions by 2050 (the ‘long-term global aspirational goal’), adopted by the 41st ICAO Assembly on 7 October 2022.
(30)
In order to facilitate progress at ICAO, the Union has on three occasions adopted time-bound derogations to the EU ETS so as to limit compliance obligations to emissions from flights between aerodromes located in the EEA, with equal treatment on routes of aircraft operators wherever they are based. The most recent derogation from the EU ETS, laid down in Regulation (EU) 2017/2392 of the European Parliament and of the Council (12), limited compliance obligations to intra-EEA flight emissions released until 2023, and envisaged potential changes to the scope of the system as regards activity to and from aerodromes located outside the EEA from 1 January 2024 onwards following the review set out in that Regulation. In order to assess the implementation of CORSIA, the pilot phase of which has begun, and how it is applied in practice, the current derogation from EU ETS obligations should be extended for surrender obligations until 31 December 2026 concerning flights operated by aircraft operators on routes not covered by CORSIA to and from relevant third countries, in respect of which EU ETS reporting and surrender obligations would otherwise apply by 31 March 2027 and 30 September 2027. That should be the last time-bound derogation to the EU ETS. A review of CORSIA should take place by 1 July 2026. If the ICAO Assembly by 31 December 2025 has not strengthened CORSIA in line with achieving its long-term global aspirational goal towards meeting the Paris Agreement goals or if the States listed in an implementing act to be adopted by the Commission represent less than 70 % of international aviation emissions using the most recent available data, then the Commission should propose, as appropriate, that the EU ETS apply to emissions from departing flights from 2027, and that aircraft operators be able to deduct any costs incurred from CORSIA offsetting on those routes, to avoid double charging. In parallel, if a third country does not apply CORSIA from 2027, the EU ETS should apply to emissions from flights departing to that third country.
(31)
Information on the use of units for compliance with offsetting requirements under CORSIA should be made publicly available in a no less transparent manner than that for information on the use of international credits under Directive 2003/87/EC until 2020 pursuant to Annex XIV of Commission Regulation (EU) No 389/2013 (13).
(32)
On 7 October 2022 and in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic, the 41st ICAO Assembly decided to change the previous baseline of CORSIA for the period from 2024 to 2035 from the average of 2019 and 2020 CO2 emissions to 85 % of 2019 CO2 emissions. The average of all reported 2019 and 2020 CO2 emissions was 435 859 594 tonnes. 2019 CO2 emissions were 608 076 604 tonnes, and 85 % of that figure is 516 865 113 tonnes. However, the actual baseline that ICAO uses to calculate the sector growth factor is determined by using a subset of CO2 emissions taking into account only emissions on routes that are subject to offsetting requirements. For the subset of all State pairs subject to offsetting requirements in the year 2021, the average of 2019 and 2020 CO2 emissions is not published by ICAO but is estimated to be 245 million tonnes, and the 2019 CO2 emissions were 341 380 188 tonnes, 85 % of which is 290 173 160 tonnes. For all State pairs expected to be subject to offsetting requirements in the year 2027, the average of 2019 and 2020 CO2 emissions is estimated to be around 373 million tonnes, while 85 % of the corresponding 2019 CO2 emissions is estimated to be around 439 million tonnes.
(33)
In order to ensure uniform conditions for establishing a list of States which are considered to be applying CORSIA for the purposes of Directive 2003/87/EC, implementing powers should be conferred on the Commission to adopt and maintain the list of States other than EEA countries, Switzerland and the United Kingdom which are considered to be participating in CORSIA for the purposes of Union law. Those powers should be exercised in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 182/2011.
(34)
The transition of the aviation sector towards sustainable aviation has to take into account the social dimension of the sector and its competitiveness, in order to ensure that that transition is socially just and provides training, reskilling and upskilling for workers. The Commission should submit a report to the European Parliament and to the Council on the application of this Directive and its social impacts on the aviation sector.
(35)
Flights spanning 1 000 kilometers and less account for 6 to 9 % of total aviation CO2 emissions. The Commission should submit a report on measures to promote a modal shift towards alternative, more sustainable modes of transport, pending technological breakthroughs and availability of zero-emission aviation fuels and aircraft.
(36)
While the EU ETS has applied to flights since 2012, the ‘Fit for 55’ package includes additional measures which, together with the EU ETS, could have a cumulative impact on the sector. In order to safeguard air connectivity for flights serving island regions or small airports, the mechanism under this Directive, which is designed to bridge the remaining price differential between fossil fuels and alternatives thereto, should limit adverse impacts on air connectivity and mitigate the risk of carbon leakage. By 2026, the Commission should report on possible effects on air connectivity.
(37)
The emission factor of jet kerosene (Jet A1 or Jet A) under the EU ETS should be aligned with the emission factor for that fuel established in CORSIA SARPs. No change in allocation levels should be made as a result of the increase in the emission factor of jet kerosene because free allocation to aviation is being gradually phased out as a result of this Directive in favour of auctioning to deliver greater emission reductions.
(38)
Renewable fuels of non-biological origin using hydrogen from renewable sources, compliant with Article 25 of Directive (EU) 2018/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council (14), should be rated as producing zero emissions for the aircraft operators using them until the detailed rules for the appropriate accounting are set under this Directive.
(39)
In order to establish detailed rules for the yearly calculation of the cost difference between fossil kerosene and eligible fuels in accordance with a regulation on ensuring a level playing field for sustainable air transport, for the allocation of allowances for the use of such eligible fuels, and for the calculation of the greenhouse gas emissions saved as a result of the use of such eligible fuels, as well as to establish arrangements for taking account of incentives deriving from the price of carbon and from harmonised minimum levels of taxation on fossil fuels, the power to adopt acts in accordance with Article 290 TFEU should be delegated to the Commission. In addition, the power to adopt acts in accordance with Article 290 TFEU should be delegated to the Commission in order to set out the detailed arrangements for the auctioning by Member States of aviation allowances, including the detailed arrangements for the auctioning necessary for the transfer of a share of revenue from such auctioning to the general budget of the Union as own resources. It is of particular importance that the Commission carry out appropriate consultations during its preparatory work, including at expert level, and that those consultations be conducted in accordance with the principles laid down in the Interinstitutional Agreement of 13 April 2016 on Better Law-Making (15). In particular, to ensure equal participation in the preparation of delegated acts, the European Parliament and the Council receive all documents at the same time as Member States’ experts, and their experts systematically have access to meetings of Commission expert groups dealing with the preparation of delegated acts.
(40)
Special consideration should be given to promoting accessibility for the outermost regions of the Union. Therefore, a temporary derogation from the EU ETS should be provided until 31 December 2030 for emissions from flights between an aerodrome located in an outermost region of a Member State and an aerodrome located in the same Member State outside that outermost region, in order to respond to the most important needs of residents in terms of employment, education and other opportunities. That derogation should, for the same reasons, cover flights between aerodromes that are both located in the same outermost region or in different outermost regions in the same Member State.
(41)
Decision (EU) 2023/136 of the European Parliament and of the Council (16) is to apply as regards the notification to aircraft operators to be carried out by Member States by 30 November 2023 under Directive 2003/87/EC provided that the sector growth factor for 2022 emissions, to be published by ICAO, equals zero.
(42)
A comprehensive approach to innovation is important to achieving the European Green Deal objectives and for the competitiveness of the European industry. This is of particular importance for sectors that are hard to decarbonise, such as aviation and shipping, where a combination of operational improvements, alternative climate-neutral fuels and technological solutions need to be deployed. Therefore, Member States should ensure that the national transposition provisions do not hamper innovations and are technologically neutral. At Union level, the necessary research and innovation efforts are supported, among other things, through Horizon Europe – the Framework Programme for Research and Innovation, which includes significant funding and new instruments for the sectors coming under the EU ETS.
(43)
The Innovation Fund established by Directive 2003/87/EC is to support research on, and the development and deployment of, decarbonisation solutions, including zero-emission technologies, and reduce the climate and environmental impacts of the aviation sector. It is also to support electrification and actions to reduce the overall impacts of aviation.
(44)
Since the objectives of this Directive, namely to ensure aviation’s contribution to the Union’s economy-wide emission reduction target and to appropriately implement CORSIA in Union law, cannot be sufficiently achieved by the Member States but can rather, by reason of its scale and effects, be better achieved at Union level, the Union may adopt measures, in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity as set out in Article 5 of the Treaty on European Union. In accordance with the principle of proportionality as set out in that Article, this Directive does not go beyond what is necessary in order to achieve those objectives.
(45)
Member States should transpose this Directive by 31 December 2023 in view of the need for urgent climate action and for all sectors to contribute to emission reduction in a cost-effective manner.
(46)
Simplifications of administrative procedures and adaptation of those procedures to best practice would keep the administrative burden to a minimum.
(47)
Directive 2003/87/EC should therefore be amended accordingly,
HAVE ADOPTED THIS DIRECTIVE:
