Article 12
General flexibilities
1.   Where, in the period from 2021 to 2025, total emissions exceed total removals in a Member State, or, in the period from 2026 to 2030, the difference between the sum of the greenhouse gas emissions and removals on the territory of a Member State and the commitment, target or budget set for that Member State in accordance with Article 4 of this Regulation is positive, and that Member State has chosen to use its flexibility, and has requested to delete annual emission allocations under Regulation (EU) 2018/842, the quantity of deleted emission allocations shall be taken into account with respect to the Member State’s compliance with its commitment, target or budget, respectively, set in accordance with Article 4 of this Regulation.
2.   To the extent that, in the period from 2021 to 2025, total removals exceed total emissions in a Member State, or, in the period from 2026 to 2030, the difference between the sum of the greenhouse gas emissions and removals on the territory of a Member State and the commitment, target or budget set for that Member State in accordance with Article 4 of this Regulation is negative, and after subtraction of any quantity taken into account under Article 7 of Regulation (EU) 2018/842, that Member State may transfer the remaining quantity of removals to another Member State. The quantity transferred shall be taken into account when assessing the recipient Member State’s compliance with its commitment, target or budget, respectively, set in accordance with Article 4 of this Regulation.
3.   In order to avoid double counting, the quantity of net removals taken into account under Article 7 of Regulation (EU) 2018/842 shall be subtracted from that Member State’s quantity available for transfer to another Member State pursuant to paragraph 2 of this Article.
4.   Member States should use revenues, or their equivalent in financial value, generated by transfers pursuant to paragraph 2 to tackle climate change in the Union or in third countries. Member States shall inform the Commission of any actions taken pursuant to this paragraph and shall make that information public in an easily accessible form.
5.   Any transfer pursuant to paragraph 2 may be the result of a greenhouse gas mitigation project or programme carried out in the selling Member State and remunerated by the receiving Member State, provided that double counting is avoided and traceability is ensured.
