Article 31
Processing of SIS II data
1.   The Member States may process the data referred to in Article 20 for the purposes of refusing entry into or a stay in their territories.
2.   Data may only be copied for technical purposes, provided that such copying is necessary in order for the authorities referred to in Article 27 to carry out a direct search. The provisions of this Regulation shall apply to such copies. Alerts issued by one Member State may not be copied from its N.SIS II into other national data files.
3.   Technical copies, as referred to in paragraph 2, which lead to off-line databases may be retained for a period not exceeding 48 hours. That period may be extended in an emergency until the emergency comes to an end.
Notwithstanding the first subparagraph, technical copies which lead to off-line databases to be used by visa issuing authorities shall no longer be permitted one year after the authority in question has been connected successfully to the Communication Infrastructure for the Visa Information System to be provided for in a future Regulation concerning the Visa Information System (VIS) and the exchange of data between Member States on short stay visas except for copies made to be used only in an emergency following the unavailability of the network for more than 24 hours.
Member States shall keep an up-to-date inventory of such copies, make this inventory available to their national supervisory authority and ensure that the provisions of this Regulation, in particular those of Article 10, are applied in respect of such copies.
4.   Access to data shall only be authorised within the limits of the competence of the national authorities referred to in Article 27 and to duly authorised staff.
5.   Data may not be used for administrative purposes. By way of derogation, data entered in accordance with this Regulation may be used in accordance with the laws of each Member State by the authorities referred to in Article 27(3) in the performance of their duties.
6.   Data entered in accordance with Article 24 of this Regulation and data concerning documents relating to persons entered under Article 38(2)(d) and (e) of Decision 2006/000/JHA may be used in accordance with the laws of each Member State for the purposes referred to in Article 27(3) of this Regulation.
7.   Any use of data which does not comply with paragraphs 1 to 6 shall be considered as misuse under the national law of each Member State.
8.   Each Member State shall send to the Management Authority a list of its competent authorities authorised to search directly the data contained in SIS II pursuant to this Regulation as well as any changes to the list. That list shall specify, for each authority, which data it may search and for what purposes. The Management Authority shall ensure the annual publication of the list in the Official Journal of the European Union.
9.   Insofar as Community law does not lay down specific provisions, the law of each Member State shall apply to data entered in its N.SIS II.
