Article 50
Monitoring and statistics
1.   The Management Authority shall ensure that procedures are in place to monitor the functioning of SIS II against objectives relating to output, cost-effectiveness, security and quality of service.
2.   For the purposes of technical maintenance, reporting and statistics, the Management Authority shall have access to the necessary information relating to the processing operations performed in Central SIS II.
3.   Each year the Management Authority shall publish statistics showing the number of records per category of alert, the number of hits per category of alert and how many times SIS II was accessed, in total and for each Member State.
4.   Two years after SIS II is brought into operation and every two years thereafter, the Management Authority shall submit to the European Parliament and the Council a report on the technical functioning of Central SIS II and the Communication Infrastructure, including the security thereof and the bilateral and multilateral exchange of supplementary information between Member States.
5.   Three years after SIS II is brought into operation and every four years thereafter, the Commission shall produce an overall evaluation of Central SIS II and the bilateral and multilateral exchange of supplementary information between Member States. This overall evaluation shall include an examination of results achieved against objectives and an assessment of the continuing validity of the underlying rationale, the application of this Regulation in respect of Central SIS II, the security of Central SIS II and any implications for future operations. The Commission shall transmit the evaluation to the European Parliament and the Council.
6.   Member States shall provide the Management Authority and the Commission with the information necessary to draft the reports referred to in paragraphs 3, 4 and 5.
7.   The Management Authority shall provide the Commission with the information necessary to produce the overall evaluations referred to in paragraph 5.
8.   During a transitional period before the Management Authority takes up its responsibilities, the Commission shall be responsible for producing and submitting the reports referred to in paragraphs 3 and 4.
