Article 6
CPC certifying the initial qualification
1.   A CPC may be awarded to certify an initial qualification, in the following circumstances:
(a)
CPC awarded on the basis of course attendance and a test
In accordance with Article 3(1), point (a)(i), Member States shall require trainee drivers to attend courses in a training centre approved by the competent authorities in accordance with Section 5 of Annex I (‘approved training centre’). Those courses shall cover all the subjects referred to in Section 1 of Annex I. That training shall conclude with the successful completion of the test provided for in Section 2, point 2.1 of Annex I. That test shall be organised by the Member States’ competent authorities or an entity designated by them and shall serve to check whether, for the subjects referred to in Section 1 of Annex I, the trainee drivers have the level of knowledge required by that Section. The said authorities or entities shall supervise the test and, upon successful completion, issue the drivers with a CPC certifying an initial qualification.
(b)
CPC awarded on the basis of tests
In accordance with Article 3(1), point (a)(ii), Member States shall require trainee drivers to pass the theoretical and practical tests referred to in Section 2, point 2.2 of Annex I. Those tests shall be organised by the Member States’ competent authorities or an entity designated by them and shall serve to check whether, for the subjects referred to in Section 1 of Annex I, the trainee drivers have the level of knowledge required by that Section. The said authorities or entities shall supervise the tests and, upon successful completion, issue the drivers with a CPC certifying an initial qualification.
2.   A CPC may be awarded to certify an accelerated initial qualification.
In accordance with Article 3(2), Member States shall require trainee drivers to attend courses in an approved training centre. Those courses shall cover all the subjects referred to in Section 1 of Annex I.
That training shall conclude with the test provided for in Section 3 of Annex I. That test shall be organised by the Member States’ competent authorities or an entity designated by them and shall serve to check whether, for the subjects referred to in Section 1 of Annex I, the trainee drivers have the level of knowledge required by that Section. The said authorities or entities shall supervise the test and, upon successful completion, issue the drivers with a CPC certifying an accelerated initial qualification.
