Article 10
Union code
1.   On the basis of the CPC certifying an initial qualification and the CPC certifying periodic training, Member States’ competent authorities shall, taking into account Article 5(2) and (3) and Article 8 of this Directive, mark the harmonised Union code, ‘95’, provided for in Annex I to Directive 2006/126/EC, alongside the corresponding categories of driving licence:
—
on the driving licence, or
—
on the driver qualification card drawn up in accordance with the standard model depicted in Annex II to this Directive.
If the competent authorities of the Member State where the CPC was obtained cannot mark the harmonised Union code on the driving licence, they shall issue the driver with a driver qualification card.
The driver qualification card issued by a Member State shall be mutually recognised. When the driver qualification card is issued, the competent authorities shall check the validity of the driving licence for the category of vehicle concerned.
2.   A driver referred to in Article 1, point (b), of this Directive who drives vehicles used for the carriage of goods by road shall also be allowed to prove that he or she has the qualification and training provided for in this Directive by means of the driver attestation provided for in Regulation (EC) No 1072/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council (9), provided that it bears the Union code, ‘95’. For the purposes of this Directive, the issuing Member State shall indicate the Union code, ‘95’, in the remarks section of the attestation if the driver concerned has fulfilled the qualification requirements and training requirements provided for in this Directive.
3.   Driver attestations that do not bear the Union code, ‘95’, and that were issued before 23 May 2020, in accordance with Article 5 of Regulation (EC) No 1072/2009, and in particular with paragraph 7 thereof, with a view to certifying compliance with training requirements under this Directive shall be accepted as a proof of qualification until their date of expiry.
