Article 3
Qualification and training
1.   The activity of driving as referred to in Article 1 shall be subject to a compulsory initial qualification and compulsory periodic training. To that end, Member States shall provide for:
(a)
a system of initial qualification
Member States shall choose between the following two options:
(i)
an option combining both course attendance and a test
In accordance with Section 2, point 2.1 of Annex I, this type of initial qualification involves compulsory course attendance for a specific period. It shall conclude with a test. Upon successful completion of the test, the qualification shall be certified by a CPC as provided for in Article 6(1), point (a);
(ii)
an option involving only tests
In accordance with Section 2, point 2.2 of Annex I, this type of initial qualification does not involve compulsory course attendance but only theoretical and practical tests. Upon successful completion of the tests, the qualification shall be certified by a CPC as provided for in Article 6(1), point (b).
However, a Member State may authorise a driver to drive within its territory before obtaining a CPC, when he or she is undergoing a national vocational training course of at least six months, for a maximum period of three years. In the context of this vocational training course, the tests referred to in points (i) and (ii) may be completed in stages;
(b)
a system of periodic training
In accordance with Section 4 of Annex I, periodic training shall involve compulsory course attendance. It shall be certified by a CPC as provided for in Article 8(1).
2.   Member States may also provide for a system of accelerated initial qualification so that a driver may drive in the cases referred to in Article 5(2), point (a)(ii) and point (b), and Article 5(3), point (a)(i) and point (b).
In accordance with Section 3 of Annex I, the accelerated initial qualification shall involve compulsory course attendance. It shall conclude with a test. Upon successful completion of the test, the qualification shall be certified by a CPC as provided for in Article 6(2).
3.   Member States may exempt drivers who have obtained the certificate of professional competence provided for in Regulation (EC) No 1071/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council (8) from the tests referred to in paragraph 1, point (a)(i) and (ii), and in paragraph 2 of this Article, in the subjects covered by the test provided for in that Regulation and, where appropriate, from attending the part of the course corresponding thereto.
