Article 10
Conversion
1.   Farmers and operators that produce algae or aquaculture animals shall comply with a conversion period. During the whole conversion period they shall apply all rules on organic production laid down in this Regulation, in particular the applicable rules on conversion set out in this Article and in Annex II.
2.   The conversion period shall start at the earliest when the farmer or the operator that produces algae or aquaculture animals has notified the activity to the competent authorities, in accordance with Article 34(1), in the Member State in which the activity is carried out and in which that farmer or operator’s holding is subject to the control system.
3.   No previous period may be retroactively recognised as being part of the conversion period, except where:
(a)
the operator’s land parcels were subject to measures which were defined in a programme implemented pursuant to Regulation (EU) No 1305/2013 for the purpose of ensuring that no products or substances other than those authorised for use in organic production have been used on those land parcels; or
(b)
the operator can provide proof that the land parcels were natural or agricultural areas that, for a period of at least three years, have not been treated with products or substances that are not authorised for use in organic production.
4.   Products produced during the conversion period shall not be marketed as organic products or as in-conversion products.
However, the following products produced during the conversion period and in compliance with paragraph 1 may be marketed as in-conversion products:
(a)
plant reproductive material, provided that a conversion period of at least 12 months has been complied with;
(b)
food products of plant origin and feed products of plant origin, provided that the product contains only one agricultural crop ingredient, and provided that a conversion period of at least 12 months before the harvest has been complied with.
5.   The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 54 amending point 1.2.2 of Part II of Annex II by adding conversion rules for species other than those regulated in Part II of Annex II on 17 June 2018, or by amending those added rules.
6.   The Commission shall, where appropriate, adopt implementing acts specifying the documents to be supplied for the purpose of the retroactive recognition of a previous period in accordance with paragraph 3 of this Article.
Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 55(2).
