Article 43
Additional rules on the exchange of information
1.   In addition to the obligations laid down in Article 105(1) and Article 106(1) of Regulation (EU) 2017/625, competent authorities shall immediately share information with other competent authorities, as well as with the Commission, on any suspicion of non–compliance that affects the integrity of organic or in-conversion products.
Competent authorities shall share that information with other competent authorities and the Commission via a computer system that enables the electronic exchanges of documents and information made available by the Commission.
2.   In cases where suspected or established non-compliance has been identified with regard to products under the control of other control authorities or control bodies, control authorities and control bodies shall immediately inform those other control authorities or control bodies.
3.   Control authorities and control bodies shall exchange other relevant information with other control authorities and control bodies.
4.   Upon receiving a request for information that is justified by the need to guarantee that a product has been produced in accordance with this Regulation, control authorities and control bodies shall exchange with other competent authorities, as well as with the Commission, information on the results of their controls.
5.   Competent authorities shall exchange information on the supervision of the control bodies with national accreditation bodies as defined in point (11) of Article 2 of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council (54).
6.   Competent authorities shall take appropriate measures and establish documented procedures in order to ensure that information about the results of controls is communicated to the paying agency in accordance with its needs for the purpose of Article 58 of Regulation (EU) No 1306/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council (55) and the acts adopted on the basis of that Article.
7.   The Commission may adopt implementing acts to specify the information to be provided by the competent authorities, control authorities and control bodies in charge of the official controls and other official activities in accordance with this Article, the relevant recipients of that information and the procedures in accordance with which this information is to be provided, including the functionalities of the computer system referred to in paragraph 1.
Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 55(2).
