Article 48
Equivalence under Regulation (EC) No 834/2007
1.   A recognised third country referred to in point (b)(iii) of Article 45(1) is a third country which has been recognised for the purposes of equivalence under Article 33(2) of Regulation (EC) No 834/2007, including those recognised under the transitional measure provided for in Article 58 of this Regulation.
That recognition shall expire on 31 December 2025.
2.   On the basis of annual reports to be sent to the Commission, by 31 March of each year, by the third countries referred to in paragraph 1 regarding the implementation and enforcement of the control measures established by them, and in the light of any other information received, the Commission shall ensure appropriate supervision of the recognised third countries by regularly reviewing their recognition. For this purpose, the Commission may request the assistance of Member States. The nature of the supervision shall be determined on the basis of an assessment of the likelihood of non-compliance, taking into account in particular the volume of exports to the Union from the third country concerned, the results of the monitoring and supervisory activities carried out by the competent authority and the results of previous controls. The Commission shall regularly report to the European Parliament and the Council on the outcome of its review.
3.   The Commission shall, by means of an implementing act, establish a list of the third countries referred to in paragraph 1 and may amend that list by means of implementing acts.
Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 55(2).
4.   The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 54 supplementing this Regulation as regards the information to be sent by the third countries listed in accordance with paragraph 3 of this Article which is necessary for the supervision of their recognition by the Commission, as well as the exercise of that supervision by the Commission, including through on-the-spot examination.
5.   The Commission may adopt implementing acts to ensure the application of measures in relation to cases of suspected or established non-compliance, in particular those affecting the integrity of organic or in-conversion products imported from third countries referred to in this Article. Such measures may consist in particular in the verification of the integrity of organic or in-conversion products before placing the products on the market within the Union and, where appropriate, in the suspension of the authorisation for the placing on the market of such products within the Union as organic products or in-conversion products.
Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 55(2).
