Article 2
Scope
1.   This Regulation applies to the following products originating from agriculture, including aquaculture and beekeeping, as listed in Annex I to the TFEU and to products originating from those products, where such products are, or are intended to be, produced, prepared, labelled, distributed, placed on the market, imported into or exported from the Union:
(a)
live or unprocessed agricultural products, including seeds and other plant reproductive material;
(b)
processed agricultural products for use as food;
(c)
feed.
This Regulation also applies to certain other products closely linked to agriculture listed in Annex I to this Regulation, where they are, or are intended to be, produced, prepared, labelled, distributed, placed on the market, imported into or exported from the Union.
2.   This Regulation applies to any operator involved, at any stage of production, preparation and distribution, in activities relating to the products referred to in paragraph 1.
3.   Mass catering operations carried out by a mass caterer as defined in point (d) of Article 2(2) of Regulation (EU) No 1169/2011 are not subject to this Regulation except as set out in this paragraph.
Member States may apply national rules or, in the absence thereof, private standards, on the production, labelling and control of products originating from mass catering operations. The organic production logo of the European Union shall not be used in the labelling, the presentation or the advertising of such products, and shall not be used to advertise the mass caterer.
4.   Except where otherwise provided, this Regulation applies without prejudice to related Union legislation, in particular, legislation in the fields of safety of the food chain, animal health and welfare, plant health and plant reproductive material.
5.   This Regulation applies without prejudice to other specific Union law relating to the placing of products on the market and, in particular, to Regulation (EU) No 1308/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council (32) and to Regulation (EU) No 1169/2011.
6.   The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 54 amending the list of products set out in Annex I by adding further products to the list, or by amending those added entries. Only products which are closely linked to agricultural products shall be eligible for inclusion in that list.
