Article 30
Use of terms referring to organic production
1.   For the purposes of this Regulation, a product shall be regarded as bearing terms referring to organic production where, in the labelling, advertising material or commercial documents, such a product, its ingredients or feed materials used for its production are described in terms suggesting to the purchaser that the product, ingredients or feed materials have been produced in accordance with this Regulation. In particular, the terms listed in Annex IV and their derivatives and diminutives, such as ‘bio’ and ‘eco’, whether alone or in combination, may be used throughout the Union and in any language listed in that Annex for the labelling and advertising of products referred to in Article 2(1) which comply with this Regulation.
2.   For the products referred to in Article 2(1), the terms referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article shall not be used anywhere in the Union, in any language listed in Annex IV, for the labelling, advertising material or commercial documents of a product which does not comply with this Regulation.
Furthermore, no terms, including terms used in trademarks or company names, or practices shall be used in labelling or advertising if they are liable to mislead the consumer or user by suggesting that a product or its ingredients comply with this Regulation.
3.   Products that have been produced during the conversion period shall not be labelled or advertised as organic products or as in-conversion products.
However, plant reproductive material, food products of plant origin and feed products of plant origin that have been produced during the conversion period, which comply with Article 10(4), may be labelled and advertised as in-conversion products by using the term ‘in-conversion’ or a corresponding term, together with the terms referred to in paragraph 1.
4.   The terms referred to in paragraph 1 and 3 shall not be used for a product for which Union law requires the labelling or advertising to state that the product contains GMOs, consists of GMOs or is produced from GMOs.
5.   For processed food, the terms referred to in paragraph 1 may be used:
(a)
in the sales description, and in the list of ingredients where such a list is mandatory pursuant to Union legislation, provided that:
(i)
the processed food complies with the production rules set out in Part IV of Annex II and with the rules laid down in accordance with Article 16(3);
(ii)
at least 95 % of the agricultural ingredients of the product by weight are organic; and
(iii)
in the case of flavourings, they are only used for natural flavouring substances and natural flavouring preparations labelled in accordance with Article 16(2), (3) and (4) of Regulation (EC) No 1334/2008 and all of the flavouring components and carriers of flavouring components in the flavouring concerned are organic;
(b)
only in the list of ingredients, provided that:
(i)
less than 95 % of the agricultural ingredients of the product by weight are organic, and provided that those ingredients comply with the production rules set out in this Regulation; and
(ii)
the processed food complies with the production rules set out in points 1.5, 2.1(a), 2.1(b) and 2.2.1 of Part IV of Annex II and with the rules laid down in accordance with Article 16(3);
(c)
in the sales description and in the list of ingredients, provided that:
(i)
the main ingredient is a product of hunting or fishing;
(ii)
the term referred to in paragraph 1 is clearly related in the sales description to another ingredient which is organic and different from the main ingredient;
(iii)
all other agricultural ingredients are organic; and
(iv)
the food complies with points 1.5, 2.1(a), 2.1(b) and 2.2.1 of Part IV of Annex II and with the rules laid down in accordance with Article 16(3).
The list of ingredients referred to in points (a), (b) and (c) of the first subparagraph shall indicate which ingredients are organic. The references to organic production may only appear in relation to the organic ingredients.
The list of ingredients referred to in points (b) and (c) of the first subparagraph shall include an indication of the total percentage of organic ingredients in proportion to the total quantity of agricultural ingredients.
The terms referred to in paragraph 1, when used in the list of ingredients referred to in points (a), (b), and (c) of the first subparagraph of this paragraph, and the indication of the percentage referred to in the third subparagraph of this paragraph shall appear in the same colour, identical size and style of lettering as the other indications in the list of ingredients.
6.   For processed feed, the terms referred to in paragraph 1 may be used in the sales description and in the list of ingredients, provided that:
(a)
the processed feed complies with the production rules set out in Parts II, III and V of Annex II and with the specific rules laid down in accordance with Article 16(3);
(b)
all of the ingredients of agricultural origin that are contained in the processed feed are organic; and
(c)
at least 95 % of the dry matter of the product are organic.
7.   The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 54 amending:
(a)
this Article by adding further rules on the labelling of products listed in Annex I, or by amending those added rules; and
(b)
the list of terms set out in Annex IV, taking into account linguistic developments within the Member States.
8.   The Commission may adopt implementing acts to set detailed requirements for the application of paragraph 3 of this Article.
Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 55(2).
