Article 32
Compulsory indications
1.   Where products bear terms as referred to in Article 30(1), including products labelled as in-conversion products in accordance with Article 30(3):
(a)
the code number of the control authority or control body to which the operator that carried out the last production or preparation operation is subject shall also appear in the labelling; and
(b)
in the case of prepacked food, the organic production logo of the European Union referred to in Article 33 shall also appear on the packaging, except in cases referred to in Article 30(3) and points (b) and (c) of Article 30(5).
2.   Where the organic production logo of the European Union is used, an indication of the place where the agricultural raw materials of which the product is composed have been farmed shall appear in the same visual field as the logo and shall take one of the following forms, as appropriate:
(a)
‘EU Agriculture’, where the agricultural raw material has been farmed in the Union;
(b)
‘non-EU Agriculture’, where the agricultural raw material has been farmed in third countries;
(c)
‘EU/non-EU Agriculture’, where a part of the agricultural raw materials has been farmed in the Union and a part of it has been farmed in a third country.
For the purposes of the first subparagraph, the word ‘Agriculture’ may be replaced by ‘Aquaculture’ where appropriate and the words ‘EU’ and ‘non-EU’ may be replaced or supplemented by the name of a country, or by the name of a country and a region, if all of the agricultural raw materials of which the product is composed have been farmed in that country and, if applicable, in that region.
For the indication of the place where the agricultural raw materials of which the product is composed have been farmed, as referred to in the first and third subparagraphs, small quantities by weight of ingredients may be disregarded, provided that the total quantity of the disregarded ingredients does not exceed 5 % of the total quantity by weight of agricultural raw materials.
The words ‘EU’ or ‘non-EU’ shall not appear in a colour, size and style of lettering that is more prominent than the name of the product.
3.   The indications referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article and in Article 33(3) shall be marked in a conspicuous place in such a way as to be easily visible, and shall be clearly legible and indelible.
4.   The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 54 amending paragraph 2 of this Article and Article 33(3) by adding further rules on labelling, or by amending those added rules.
5.   The Commission shall adopt implementing acts relating to:
(a)
practical arrangements for the use, presentation, composition and size of the indications referred to in point (a) of paragraph 1 and in paragraph 2 of this Article and in Article 33(3);
(b)
the assignment of code numbers to control authorities and control bodies;
(c)
the indication of the place where the agricultural raw materials were farmed, in accordance with paragraph 2 of this Article and with Article 33(3).
Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 55(2).
