Article 25
Authorisation of non-organic agricultural ingredients for processed organic food by Member States
1.   Where it is necessary in order to ensure access to certain agricultural ingredients, and where such ingredients are not available in organic form in sufficient quantity, a Member State may, at the request of an operator, provisionally authorise the use of non-organic agricultural ingredients for the production of processed organic food on its territory for a period of maximum six months. That authorisation shall apply to all operators in that Member State.
2.   The Member State shall immediately notify the Commission and the other Member States, via a computer system that enables the electronic exchange of documents and information made available by the Commission, of any authorisation granted for its territory in accordance with paragraph 1.
3.   The Member State may prolong the authorisation provided for in paragraph 1 two times for a maximum of six months each, provided that no other Member State has objected by indicating, via the system referred to in paragraph 2, that such ingredients are available in organic form in sufficient quantity.
4.   A control authority or a control body recognised in accordance with Article 46(1) may grant a provisional authorisation, as referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article, for a maximum of six months to operators in third countries that request such an authorisation and that are subject to controls by that control authority or control body, provided that the conditions of that paragraph are fulfilled in the third country concerned. The authorisation may be prolonged for a maximum of two times six months each.
5.   Where, after two prolongations of a provisional authorisation, a Member State considers, on the basis of objective information, that the availability of such ingredients in organic form remains insufficient to meet the qualitative and quantitative needs of operators, it may make a request to the Commission in accordance with Article 24(7).
