Article 26
Collection of data concerning the availability on the market of organic and in-conversion plant reproductive material, organic animals and organic aquaculture juveniles
1.   Each Member State shall ensure that a regularly updated database is established for the listing of the organic and in-conversion plant reproductive material, excluding seedlings but including seed potatoes, which is available on its territory.
2.   Member States shall have in place systems that allow operators that market organic or in-conversion plant reproductive material, organic animals or organic aquaculture juveniles, and that are able to supply them in sufficient quantities and within a reasonable period, to make public on a voluntary basis, free of charge, together with their names and contact details, information on the following:
(a)
the organic and in-conversion plant reproductive material, such as plant reproductive material of organic heterogeneous material or of organic varieties suitable for organic production, excluding seedlings but including seed potatoes, which is available; the quantity in weight of that material; and the period of the year of its availability; such material shall be listed using at least the Latin scientific name;
(b)
the organic animals for which derogation may be provided in accordance with point 1.3.4.4 of Part II of Annex II; the number of available animals categorised by sex; information, if relevant, relating to the different species of animals as regards the breeds and strains available; the races of the animals; the age of the animals; and any other relevant information;
(c)
the organic aquaculture juveniles available on the holding and their health status in accordance with Council Directive 2006/88/EC (52) and the production capacity for each aquaculture species.
3.   Member States may also set up systems which allow operators that market breeds and strains adapted to organic production in accordance with point 1.3.3 of Part II of Annex II or organic pullets and that are able to supply those animals in sufficient quantities and within a reasonable period to make public the relevant information on a voluntary basis, free of charge, together with names and contact details.
4.   Operators that opt to include information on plant reproductive material, animals or aquaculture juveniles in the systems referred to in paragraphs 2 and 3 shall ensure that the information is updated regularly, and shall ensure that the information is withdrawn from the lists once the plant reproductive material, animals or aquaculture juveniles are no longer available.
5.   For the purpose of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3, Member States may continue to use relevant information systems that are already in existence.
6.   The Commission shall make public the link to each of the national databases or systems on a dedicated website of the Commission, in order to allow users to have access to such databases or systems throughout the Union.
7.   The Commission may adopt implementing acts providing:
(a)
technical details for establishing and maintaining the databases referred to in paragraph 1 and the systems referred to in paragraph 2;
(b)
specifications as regards the collection of information referred to in paragraph 1 and 2;
(c)
specifications as regards the arrangements for participation in the databases referred to in paragraph 1 and in the systems referred to in paragraphs 2 and 3; and
(d)
details as regards the information to be provided by Member States in accordance with Article 53(6).
Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 55(2).
