Article 40
Additional rules on the delegation of official control tasks and tasks related to other official activities
1.   Competent authorities may delegate to control bodies certain official control tasks and certain tasks related to other official activities only if the following conditions, in addition to those set out in Chapter III of Regulation (EU) 2017/625, are satisfied:
(a)
the delegation contains a detailed description of the delegated official control tasks and tasks related to other official activities, including reporting obligations and other specific obligations, and of the conditions under which the control body may carry them out. In particular, the control body shall have submitted the following to the competent authorities for prior approval:
(i)
its risk assessment procedure, which is to determine, in particular, the basis for the intensity and frequency of the verification of compliance of the operators and groups of operators, which is to be established on the basis of the elements referred to in Article 9 of Regulation (EU) 2017/625 and of Article 38 of this Regulation, and which is to be followed for official controls on operators and groups of operators;
(ii)
the standard control procedure, which is to contain a detailed description of the control measures that the control body undertakes to apply to the operators and groups of operators that are subject to its controls;
(iii)
a list of measures that are in conformity with the common catalogue referred to in Article 41(4), and that are to be applied to operators and groups of operators in cases of suspected or established non-compliance;
(iv)
the arrangements for the effective monitoring of the official control tasks and tasks related to other official activities carried out in relation to operators and groups of operators and the arrangements for reporting on those tasks.
The control body shall notify subsequent amendment of the elements referred to in points (i) to (iv) to the competent authority;
(b)
those competent authorities have procedures and arrangements in place to ensure the supervision of control bodies, including to verify that the delegated tasks are carried out effectively, independently and objectively, in particular as regards the intensity and frequency of the verification of compliance.
At least once a year, competent authorities shall, pursuant to point (a) of Article 33 of Regulation (EU) 2017/625, organise audits of the control bodies to whom they have delegated official control tasks or tasks related to other official activities.
2.   By way of derogation from Article 31(3) of Regulation (EU) 2017/625, competent authorities may delegate to a control body the decision concerning the tasks provided for in point (b) of Article 138(1) and in Article 138(2) and (3) of that Regulation.
3.   For the purpose of point (b)(iv) of Article 29 of Regulation (EU) 2017/625, the standard for the delegation of certain official control tasks and certain tasks related to other official activities to verify compliance with this Regulation which is relevant in relation to the scope of this Regulation is the most recently notified version of the international harmonised standard for ‘Conformity assessment – Requirements for bodies certifying products, processes and services’, the reference of which has been published in the Official Journal of the European Union.
4.   Competent authorities shall not delegate the following official control tasks and tasks related to other official activities to control bodies:
(a)
the supervision and audit of other control authorities or control bodies;
(b)
the power to grant derogations other than derogations for the use of plant reproductive material not obtained from organic production;
(c)
the authority to receive notifications of activities by operators or groups of operators under Article 34(1) of this Regulation;
(d)
the assessment of the likelihood of non-compliance with the provisions of this Regulation that determine the frequency with which physical checks are to be performed on organic consignments prior to their release for free circulation into the Union in accordance with Article 54 of Regulation (EU) 2017/625;
(e)
the establishment of the common catalogue of measures referred to in Article 41(4) of this Regulation.
5.   Competent authorities shall not delegate official control tasks or tasks related to other official activities to natural persons.
6.   Competent authorities shall ensure that information received from control bodies pursuant to Article 32 of Regulation (EU) 2017/625 and information on the measures applied by control bodies in the case of established or likely non-compliance is collected and used by the competent authorities in order to supervise the activities of those controls bodies.
7.   Where a competent authority has fully or partially withdrawn the delegation of certain official control tasks or certain tasks related to other official activities in accordance with point (b) of Article 33 of Regulation (EU) 2017/625, it shall decide whether any certificates issued by the control bodies concerned before the date of that partial or full withdrawal are to remain valid, and shall inform the operators concerned of that decision.
8.   Without prejudice to point (b) of Article 33 of Regulation (EU) 2017/625, before fully or partly withdrawing the delegation of official control tasks or tasks related to other official activities in the cases referred to in that point, competent authorities may fully or partly suspend that delegation:
(a)
for a period that shall not exceed 12 months, during which the control body is to remedy the shortcomings identified during audits and inspections or to address the non-compliance about which information was shared with other control authorities and control bodies, with competent authorities as well as with the Commission in accordance with Article 43 of this Regulation; or
(b)
for the period during which the accreditation referred to in point (b)(iv) of Article 29 of Regulation (EU) 2017/625, in connection with Article 40(3) of this Regulation, is suspended.
Where the delegation of official control tasks or tasks related to other official activities has been suspended, the control bodies concerned shall not issue certificates referred to in Article 35 for those parts for which the delegation has been suspended. Competent authorities shall decide whether any certificates issued by the control bodies concerned before the date of that partial or full suspension are to remain valid, and shall inform the operators concerned of that decision.
Without prejudice to Article 33 of Regulation (EU) 2017/625, the competent authorities shall lift the suspension of the delegation of official control tasks or tasks related to other official activities as soon as possible once the control body has remedied the shortcomings or non-compliances referred to in point (a) of the first subparagraph or once the accreditation body has lifted the suspension of the accreditation referred to in point (b) of the first subparagraph.
9.   Where a control body to whom competent authorities have delegated certain official control tasks or certain tasks related to other official activities has also been recognised by the Commission in accordance with Article 46(1) of this Regulation to carry out control activities in third countries, and the Commission intends to withdraw or has withdrawn the recognition of that control body, competent authorities shall organise audits or inspections on the control body as regards its activities in the Member State(s) concerned in accordance with point (a) of Article 33 of Regulation (EU) 2017/625.
10.   The control bodies shall transmit to the competent authorities:
(a)
a list of the operators which were subject to their controls on 31 December of the previous year by 31 January of each year; and
(b)
information on the official controls and other official activities carried out in the previous year to support the preparation of the part on organic production and labelling of organic products of the annual report referred to in Article 113 of Regulation (EU) 2017/625 by 31 March of each year.
11.   The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 54 supplementing this Regulation as regards conditions for the delegation of official control tasks and tasks related to other official activities to control bodies additional to the conditions laid down in paragraph 1 of this Article.
