Article 11
Independent supervisory authority
1.   Member States shall nominate or establish an independent authority as their national independent supervisory authority in order to ensure the correct application of the measures taken to comply with this Directive and to assume, at least, the tasks assigned under Article 6. Such an authority may be the same as the entity entrusted by a Member State with the application of the additional regulatory measures referred to in Article 1(5), including with the approval of the charging system and/or the level of airport charges, provided that it meets the requirements of paragraph 3 of this Article.
2.   In compliance with national law, this Directive shall not prevent the independent supervisory authority from delegating, under its supervision and full responsibility, the implementation of this Directive to other independent supervisory authorities, provided that implementation takes place in accordance with the same standards.
3.   Member States shall guarantee the independence of the independent supervisory authority by ensuring that it is legally distinct from and functionally independent of any airport managing body and air carrier. Member States that retain ownership of airports, airport managing bodies or air carriers or control of airport managing bodies or air carriers shall ensure that the functions relating to such ownership or control are not vested in the independent supervisory authority. Member States shall ensure that the independent supervisory authority exercises its powers impartially and transparently.
4.   Member States shall notify the Commission of the name and address of the independent supervisory authority, its assigned tasks and responsibilities, and of the measures taken to ensure compliance with paragraph 3.
5.   Member States may establish a funding mechanism for the independent supervisory authority, which may include levying a charge on airport users and airport managing bodies.
6.   Member States shall ensure, in respect of disagreements referred to in Article 6(3), that measures are taken to:
(a)
establish a procedure for resolving disagreements between the airport managing body and the airport users;
(b)
determine the conditions under which a disagreement may be brought to the independent supervisory authority. The authority shall, in particular, dismiss complaints which it deems are not properly justified or adequately documented; and
(c)
determine the criteria against which disagreements will be assessed for resolution.
These procedures, conditions and criteria shall be non-discriminatory, transparent and objective.
7.   When undertaking an investigation into the justification for the modification of the system or the level of airport charges as set out in Article 6, the independent supervisory authority shall have access to necessary information from the parties concerned and shall be required to consult the parties concerned in order to reach its decision. Without prejudice to Article 6(4), it shall issue a final decision as soon as possible, and in any case within four months of the matter being brought before it. This period may be extended by two months in exceptional and duly justified cases. The decisions of the independent supervisory authority shall have binding effect, without prejudice to parliamentary or judicial review, as applicable in the Member States.
8.   The independent supervisory authority shall publish an annual report concerning its activities.
