Article 14
Follow-up in the case of major or dangerous deficiencies
1.   Without prejudice to Article 14(3), Member States shall provide that any major or dangerous deficiency revealed by an initial or more detailed inspection is to be rectified before the vehicle is further used on public roads.
2.   The inspector may decide that the vehicle is to be subject to a full roadworthiness test within a specified time limit if it is registered in the Member State where the technical roadside inspection has been carried out. If the vehicle is registered in another Member State, the competent authority may request the competent authority of that other Member State, via the contact points referred to in Article 17, to carry out a new roadworthiness test of the vehicle following the procedure laid down in Article 18(2). Where major or dangerous deficiencies are found in a vehicle registered outside the Union, Member States may decide to inform the competent authority of the country of registration of the vehicle.
3.   In the case of any deficiencies which require prompt or immediate rectification due to any direct and immediate risk to road safety, the Member State or the competent authority concerned shall provide that the use of the vehicle in question is to be restricted or prohibited until those deficiencies have been rectified. The use of such a vehicle may be permitted in order to enable it to reach one of the closest workshops where those deficiencies can be rectified, on condition that the dangerous deficiencies in question have been fixed in such a way as to allow it to reach that workshop and that there is no immediate risk to the safety of its occupants or other road users. In the case of deficiencies that do not require immediate rectification, the Member State or the competent authority concerned may decide on the conditions and a reasonable timespan under which the vehicle may be used before the deficiencies are rectified.
Where the vehicle cannot be fixed in such a way to allow it to reach the workshop, the vehicle may be brought to an available location where it can be repaired.
