Article 1
Regulation (EC) No 91/2003 is amended as follows:
(1)
Article 3 is amended as follows:
(a)
in paragraph 1, points 24-30 are deleted;
(b)
paragraph 2 is replaced by the following:
‘2.   The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 10 concerning the amendment of the present Article to adapt the technical definitions set out in points 8 to 10 and 21 to 23 of paragraph 1 and to provide for additional technical definitions, when needed to take into account new developments which require a certain level of technical detail to be defined in order to ensure the harmonisation of statistics.
When exercising that power the Commission shall ensure that the delegated acts do not impose a significant additional burden on the Member States or on the respondents. Furthermore, the Commission shall duly justify the statistical actions for which those delegated acts provide, using, where appropriate, cost-effectiveness analysis, including an assessment of the burden on respondents and of the production costs, as referred to in point (c) of Article 14(3) of Regulation (EC) No 223/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council (*1).

(*1)  Regulation (EC) No 223/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 March 2009 on European statistics and repealing Regulation (EC, Euratom) No 1101/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council on the transmission of data subject to statistical confidentiality to the Statistical Office of the European Communities, Council Regulation (EC) No 322/97 on Community Statistics, and Council Decision 89/382/EEC, Euratom establishing a Committee on the Statistical Programmes of the European Communities (OJ L 87, 31.3.2009, p. 164).’;"
                        
(2)
Article 4 is amended as follows:
(a)
in paragraph 1, points (b), (d) and (h) are deleted;
(b)
paragraph 2 is replaced by the following:
‘2.   Member States shall report under Annexes A and C data for undertakings that have:
(a)
a total volume of goods transport of at least 200 000 000 tonne-km or at least 500 000 tonnes;
(b)
a total volume of passenger transport of at least 100 000 000 passenger-km.
Reporting under Annexes A and C shall be optional in respect of undertakings falling below the thresholds referred to in points (a) and (b).’;
(c)
paragraph 3 is replaced by the following:
‘3.   Member States shall report under Annex L the total data for undertakings falling below the thresholds referred to in paragraph 2 if those data are not reported under Annexes A and C, as specified in Annex L.’;
(3)
in Article 5(2), point (b) is replaced by the following:
‘(b)
administrative data, including data collected by regulatory authorities, in particular the rail freight waybill if one is available;’;
(4)
Article 7 is replaced by the following:
‘Article 7
Dissemination
Statistics based on the data specified in Annexes A, C, E, F, G and L shall be disseminated by the Commission (Eurostat).
The Commission shall adopt implementing acts laying down the arrangements for the dissemination of results. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 11(2).’;
(5)
Article 8 is amended as follows:
(a)
the following paragraph is inserted:
‘1a.   Member States shall take all measures necessary to ensure the quality of the data transmitted.’;
(b)
the following paragraphs are added:
‘3.   For the purposes of this Regulation, the quality criteria to be applied to the data to be transmitted are those referred to in Article 12(1) of Regulation (EC) No 223/2009.
4.   The Commission shall adopt implementing acts specifying the detailed arrangements, structure, periodicity and comparability elements for the standard quality reports. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 11(2).’;
(6)
Article 9 is replaced by the following:
‘Article 9
Reports on implementation
By 31 December 2020 and every four years thereafter, the Commission, after consulting the European Statistical System Committee, shall submit a report to the European Parliament and to the Council on the implementation of this Regulation and on future developments.
In that report, the Commission shall take account of relevant information provided by Member States relating to the quality of the data transmitted, the data collection methods used and information on potential improvements and on users' needs.
In particular, that report shall:
(a)
assess the benefits, accruing to the Union, the Member States and the providers and users of statistical information, of the statistics produced, in relation to their costs;
(b)
assess the quality of the data transmitted, the data collection methods used and the quality of the statistics produced.’;
(7)
Article 10 is replaced by the following:
‘Article 10
Exercise of the delegation
1.   The power to adopt delegated acts is conferred on the Commission subject to the conditions laid down in this Article.
2.   The power to adopt delegated acts referred to in Article 3(2) shall be conferred on the Commission for a period of five years from 13 December 2016. The Commission shall draw up a report in respect of the delegation of power not later than nine months before the end of the five year period. The delegation of power shall be tacitly extended for periods of an identical duration, unless the European Parliament or the Council opposes such extension not later than three months before the end of each period.
3.   The delegation of power referred to in Article 3(2) may be revoked at any time by the European Parliament or by the Council. A decision to revoke shall put an end to the delegation of the power specified in that decision. It shall take effect the day following the publication of the decision in the Official Journal of the European Union or at a later date specified therein. It shall not affect the validity of any delegated acts already in force.
4.   Before adopting a delegated act, the Commission shall consult experts designated by each Member State in accordance with the principles laid down in the Interinstitutional Agreement of 13 April 2016 on Better Law-Making (*2).
5.   As soon as it adopts a delegated act, the Commission shall notify it simultaneously to the European Parliament and to the Council.
6.   A delegated act adopted pursuant to Article 3(2) shall enter into force only if no objection has been expressed either by the European Parliament or the Council within a period of two months of notification of that act to the European Parliament and the Council or if, before the expiry of that period, the European Parliament and the Council have both informed the Commission that they will not object. That period shall be extended by two months at the initiative of the European Parliament or of the Council.

(*2)  
                                          OJ L 123, 12.5.2016, p. 1.’;"
                        
(8)
Article 11 is replaced by the following:
‘Article 11
Committee procedure
1.   The Commission shall be assisted by the European Statistical System Committee established by Regulation (EC) No 223/2009. That committee shall be a committee within the meaning of Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council (*3).
2.   Where reference is made to this paragraph, Article 5 of Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 shall apply.

(*3)  Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 February 2011 laying down the rules and general principles concerning mechanisms for control by Member States of the Commission's exercise of implementing powers (OJ L 55, 28.2.2011, p. 13).’;"
                        
(9)
Article 12 is deleted;
(10)
Annexes B, D, H and I are deleted;
(11)
Annex C is replaced by the text appearing in Annex I to this Regulation;
(12)
Annex L, as set out in Annex II to this Regulation, is added.
