Article 15
Inspection of air-conditioning systems
1.   Member States shall lay down the necessary measures to establish regular inspections of the accessible parts of air-conditioning systems or of systems for combined air-conditioning and ventilation, with an effective rated output of over 70 kW. The inspection shall include an assessment of the efficiency and sizing of the air-conditioning system compared with the cooling requirements of the building and, where relevant, consider the capabilities of the air-conditioning system or of the system for combined air-conditioning and ventilation to optimise its performance under typical or average operating conditions.
Where no changes have been made to the air-conditioning system or to the system for combined air-conditioning and ventilation or to the cooling requirements of the building following an inspection carried out pursuant to this paragraph, Member States may choose not to require the assessment of the sizing of the air-conditioning system to be repeated.
Member States that maintain more stringent requirements pursuant to Article 1(3) shall be exempt from the obligation to notify them to the Commission.
2.   Technical building systems that are explicitly covered by an agreed energy performance criterion or a contractual arrangement specifying an agreed level of energy efficiency improvement, such as energy performance contracting, or that are operated by a utility or network operator and therefore subject to performance monitoring measures on the system side, shall be exempt from the requirements laid down in paragraph 1, provided that the overall impact of such an approach is equivalent to that resulting from paragraph 1.
3.   As an alternative to paragraph 1 and provided that the overall impact is equivalent to that resulting from paragraph 1, Member States may opt to take measures to ensure the provision of advice to users concerning the replacement of air-conditioning systems or systems for combined air-conditioning and ventilation, other modifications to the air-conditioning system or system for combined air-conditioning and ventilation and alternative solutions to assess the efficiency and appropriate size of those systems.
Before applying the alternative measures referred to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph, each Member State shall, by means of submitting a report to the Commission, document the equivalence of the impact of those measures to the impact of the measures referred to in paragraph 1.
Such a report shall be submitted in accordance with the applicable planning and reporting obligations.
4.   Member States shall lay down requirements to ensure that, where technically and economically feasible, non-residential buildings with an effective rated output for systems for air-conditioning or systems for combined air-conditioning and ventilation of over 290 kW are equipped with building automation and control systems by 2025.
The building automation and control systems shall be capable of:
(a)
continuously monitoring, logging, analysing and allowing for adjusting energy use;
(b)
benchmarking the building’s energy efficiency, detecting losses in efficiency of technical building systems, and informing the person responsible for the facilities or technical building management about opportunities for energy efficiency improvement; and
(c)
allowing communication with connected technical building systems and other appliances inside the building, and being interoperable with technical building systems across different types of proprietary technologies, devices and manufacturers.
5.   Member States may lay down requirements to ensure that residential buildings are equipped with:
(a)
the functionality of continuous electronic monitoring that measures systems’ efficiency and informs building owners or managers when it has fallen significantly and when system servicing is necessary, and
(b)
effective control functionalities to ensure optimum generation, distribution, storage and use of energy.
6.   Buildings that comply with paragraph 4 or 5 shall be exempt from the requirements laid down in paragraph 1.’.
(8)
Article 19 is replaced by the following:
‘Article 19
Review
The Commission, assisted by the Committee established by Article 26, shall review this Directive by 1 January 2026 at the latest, in the light of the experience gained and progress made during its application, and, if necessary, make proposals.
As part of that review, the Commission shall examine in what manner Member States could apply integrated district or neighbourhood approaches in Union building and energy efficiency policy, while ensuring that each building meets the minimum energy performance requirements, for example by means of overall renovation schemes applying to a number of buildings in a spatial context instead of a single building.
The Commission shall, in particular, assess the need for further improvement of energy performance certificates in accordance with Article 11.’.
(9)
The following Article is inserted:
‘Article 19a
Feasibility study
The Commission shall, before 2020, conclude a feasibility study, clarifying the possibilities and timeline to introduce the inspection of stand-alone ventilation systems and an optional building renovation passport that is complementary to the energy performance certificates, in order to provide a long-term, step-by-step renovation roadmap for a specific building based on quality criteria, following an energy audit, and outlining relevant measures and renovations that could improve the energy performance.’.
(10)
In Article 20(2), the first subparagraph is replaced by the following:
‘2.   Member States shall in particular provide information to the owners or tenants of buildings on energy performance certificates, including their purpose and objectives, on cost-effective measures and, where appropriate, financial instruments, to improve the energy performance of the building, and on replacing fossil fuel boilers with more sustainable alternatives. Member States shall provide the information through accessible and transparent advisory tools such as renovation advice and one-stop-shops.’.
(11)
Article 23 is replaced by the following:
‘Article 23
Exercise of the delegation
1.   The power to adopt delegated acts is conferred on the Commission subject to the conditions laid down in this Article.
2.   The power to adopt delegated acts referred to in Articles 5, 8 and 22 shall be conferred on the Commission for a period of five years from 9 July 2018. The Commission shall draw up a report in respect of the delegation of power not later than nine months before the end of the five-year period. The delegation of power shall be tacitly extended for periods of an identical duration, unless the European Parliament or the Council opposes such extension not later than three months before the end of each period.
3.   The delegation of power referred to in Articles 5, 8 and 22 may be revoked at any time by the European Parliament or by the Council. A decision to revoke shall put an end to the delegation of the power specified in that decision. It shall take effect the day following the publication of the decision in the Official Journal of the European Union or at a later date specified therein. It shall not affect the validity of any delegated acts already in force.
4.   Before adopting a delegated act, the Commission shall consult experts designated by each Member State in accordance with the principles laid down in the Interinstitutional Agreement of 13 April 2016 on Better Law-Making.
5.   As soon as it adopts a delegated act, the Commission shall notify it simultaneously to the European Parliament and to the Council.
6.   A delegated act adopted pursuant to Article 5, 8 or 22 shall enter into force only if no objection has been expressed either by the European Parliament or the Council within a period of two months of notification of that act to the European Parliament and the Council or if, before the expiry of that period, the European Parliament and the Council have both informed the Commission that they will not object. That period shall be extended by two months at the initiative of the European Parliament or of the Council.’.
(12)
Articles 24 and 25 are deleted.
(13)
Article 26 is replaced by the following:
‘Article 26
Committee procedure
1.   The Commission shall be assisted by a committee. That committee shall be a committee within the meaning of Regulation (EU) No 182/2011.
2.   Where reference is made to this paragraph, Article 4 of Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 shall apply.
3.   Where reference is made to this paragraph, Article 5 of Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 shall apply.’.
(14)
The Annexes are amended in accordance with the Annex to this Directive.
