Article 8
General provisions
1.   Member States may not grant any EC type-approval without first ensuring that the procedures referred to in Article 12 have been duly and satisfactorily implemented.
2.   Member States shall grant EC type-approvals in accordance with Articles 9 and 10.
3.   If a Member State finds that a type of vehicle, system, component or separate technical unit, albeit in conformity with the required provisions, presents a serious risk to road safety or seriously harms the environment or seriously harms public health, it may refuse to grant EC type-approval. In this case, it shall immediately send the other Member States and the Commission a detailed file explaining the reasons for its decision and setting out the evidence for its findings.
4.   EC type-approval certificates shall be numbered in accordance with the method set out in Annex VII.
5.   The approval authority shall, within 20 working days, send to the approval authorities of the other Member States a copy of the EC vehicle type-approval certificate, together with the attachments, for each type of vehicle which it has approved. The hard copy may be replaced by an electronic file.
6.   The approval authority shall inform without delay the approval authorities of the other Member States of its refusal or withdrawal of any vehicle approval, together with the reasons for its decision.
7.   The approval authority shall send at three-monthly intervals to the approval authorities of the other Member States a list of the system, component or separate technical unit EC type-approvals it has granted, amended, refused to grant or withdrawn during the preceding period. That list shall contain the particulars specified in Annex XIV.
8.   If so requested by another Member State, the Member State which has granted an EC type-approval shall, within 20 working days of receiving that request, send a copy of the EC type-approval certificate in question, together with the attachments. The hard copy may be replaced by an electronic file.
