Article 31
Sale and entry into service of parts or equipment which are capable of posing a significant risk to the correct functioning of essential systems
1.   Member States shall permit the sale, the offer for sale or entry into service of parts or equipment which are capable of posing a significant risk to the correct functioning of systems that are essential for the safety of the vehicle or for its environmental performance, only if those parts or equipment have been authorised by an approval authority in accordance with paragraphs 5 to 10.
2.   Parts or equipment subject to authorisation in accordance with paragraph 1 shall be inserted in the list to be established in Annex XIII. Such a decision shall be preceded by an evaluation resulting in a report and strive for a fair balance between the following elements:
(a)
the existence of a serious risk to the safety or environmental performance of vehicles fitted with the parts or equipment under consideration; and
(b)
the effect on consumers and manufacturers in the after-market of the imposition under this Article of a possible authorisation requirement on the parts or equipment under consideration.
3.   Paragraph 1 shall not apply to original parts or equipment which are covered by a system type-approval with respect to a vehicle and to parts or equipment which are type-approved in accordance with the provisions of one of the regulatory acts listed in Annex IV, except where those approvals relate to aspects other than those covered in paragraph 1. Paragraph 1 shall not apply to parts or equipment exclusively produced for racing vehicles not intended for use on public roads. If parts or equipment included in Annex XIII have a dual use for racing and on the road, these parts or equipment may not be sold or offered for sale to the general public for use in on-road vehicles unless they comply with the requirements of this Article.
Where appropriate, the Commission shall adopt provisions for identifying the parts or equipment referred to in this paragraph.
4.   The Commission shall, after consulting stakeholders, establish the procedure and the requirements of the authorisation process referred to in paragraph 1, and adopt the provisions for the subsequent updating of the list established in Annex XIII. Those requirements shall include prescriptions for safety, environmental protection and, where needed, for testing standards. They may be based on the regulatory acts listed in Annex IV, may be developed according to the relevant state of safety, environmental and testing technology, or, if this is an appropriate way of achieving the required safety or environmental objectives, may consist of a comparison of the part or equipment with the environmental or safety performance of the original vehicle, or of any of its parts, as appropriate.
5.   For the purposes of paragraph 1, the manufacturer of parts or equipment shall submit to the approval authority a test report drafted by a designated technical service which certifies that the parts or equipment for which authorisation is sought comply with the requirements referred to in paragraph 4. The manufacturer may introduce only one application per type per part with only one approval authority.
The application shall include details concerning the manufacturer of the parts or equipment, the type, identification and part numbers of the parts or equipment for which authorisation is sought, as well as the vehicle manufacturer’s name, type of vehicle and, if appropriate, years of construction or any other information permitting the identification of the vehicle for which the fitting of such parts or equipment is intended.
When the approval authority is satisfied, taking account of the test report and other evidence, that the parts or equipment in question comply with the requirements referred to in paragraph 4, it shall issue a certificate to the manufacturer without unjustified delay. This certificate shall authorise the parts or equipment to be sold, offered for sale or fitted to vehicles in the Community subject to the second subparagraph of paragraph 9.
6.   Each part or piece of equipment authorised in application of this Article shall be appropriately marked.
The Commission shall establish marking and packaging requirements, as well as the model and numbering system of the certificate referred to in paragraph 5.
7.   The measures referred to in paragraphs 2 to 6 shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 40(2) as they are designed to amend non-essential elements of this Directive, inter alia by supplementing it.
8.   The manufacturer shall inform without delay the approval authority that issued the certificate of any change affecting the conditions under which it was delivered. That approval authority shall decide whether the certificate has to be reviewed or reissued and whether fresh tests are necessary.
The manufacturer shall be responsible for ensuring that the parts and equipment are produced and continue to be produced under the conditions under which the certificate was issued.
9.   Before delivering any authorisation, the approval authority shall verify the existence of satisfactory arrangements and procedures for ensuring effective control of the conformity of production.
Where the approval authority finds that the conditions for issuing the authorisation are no longer fulfilled, it shall request the manufacturer to take the necessary measures to ensure that the parts or equipment are brought back into conformity. If necessary, it shall withdraw the authorisation.
10.   Any disagreement between Member States in relation to the certificates referred to in paragraph 5 shall be brought to the attention of the Commission. It shall take appropriate measures, including, where necessary, requiring the withdrawal of the authorisation, after having consulted the Member States.
11.   This Article shall not be applicable to a part or piece of equipment before it is listed in Annex XIII. For any entry or group of entries in Annex XIII a reasonable transitional period shall be fixed to allow the manufacturer of the part or equipment to apply for and obtain an authorisation. At the same time a date may be fixed, where appropriate, to exclude parts and equipment designed for vehicles type-approved before that date from the application of this Article.
12.   As long as a decision as to whether or not a part or piece of equipment is to be included in the list referred to in paragraph 1 has not been taken, Member States may maintain national provisions dealing with parts or equipment which are capable of posing a significant risk to the correct functioning of systems that are essential for the safety of the vehicle or its environmental performance.
Once such a decision in this regard has been taken, the national provisions dealing with the parts or equipment in question shall cease to be valid.
13.   As from 29 October 2007, Member States shall not adopt new provisions dealing with parts and equipment which can affect the correct functioning of systems that are essential for the safety of the vehicle or its environmental performance.
