Article 39
Implementation measures and amendments to this Directive and the separate directives and regulations
1.   The Commission shall adopt the measures necessary for the implementation of each separate directive or regulation in compliance with the rules laid down in each directive or regulation concerned.
2.   The Commission shall adopt amendments to the annexes to this Directive or to the provisions of the separate directives or regulations listed in Part I of Annex IV, which are necessary to adapt them to the development of scientific and technical knowledge or to the specific needs of persons with disabilities.
3.   The Commission shall adopt amendments to this Directive which are necessary to lay down technical requirements for small series vehicles, vehicles approved under the individual approval procedure and special purpose vehicles.
4.   When the Commission becomes aware of serious risks to road users or to the environment, which require urgent measures, it may amend the provisions of the separate directives or regulations listed in Part I of Annex IV.
5.   The Commission shall adopt amendments which are necessary in the interest of good administration and in particular those needed to ensure the coherence of the separate directives or regulations listed in Part I of Annex IV either amongst themselves or with other pieces of Community law.
6.   When, in application of Decision 97/836/EC, new UNECE Regulations or amendments to existing UNECE Regulations to which the Community has acceded are adopted, the Commission shall amend the annexes to this Directive accordingly.
7.   Each new separate directive or regulation shall introduce the appropriate amendments to the annexes to this Directive.
8.   The annexes to this Directive may be amended by means of regulations.
9.   Measures referred to in this Article shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 40(2) as they are designed to amend non-essential elements of this Directive or of the separate directives and regulations, inter alia by supplementing them.
