Article 9
Specific provisions concerning vehicles
1.   Member States shall grant an EC approval in respect of:
(a)
a type of vehicle which conforms to the particulars in the information folder and which meets the technical requirements specified by the relevant regulatory acts listed in Annex IV;
(b)
a type of special-purpose vehicle which conforms to the particulars in the information folder and which meets the technical requirements specified by the relevant regulatory acts listed in Annex XI.
The procedures set out in Annex V shall apply.
2.   Member States shall grant a multi-stage type-approval in respect of a type of incomplete or completed vehicle which conforms to the particulars in the information folder and which meets the technical requirements specified by the relevant regulatory acts listed in Annex IV or Annex XI, having regard to the state of completion of the vehicle.
The multi-stage type-approval shall apply also to complete vehicles converted or modified by another manufacturer.
The procedures set out in Annex XVII shall apply.
3.   In respect of each type of vehicle, the approval authority shall:
(a)
complete all the relevant sections of the EC type-approval certificate, including the test results sheet appended thereto, in accordance with the model set out in Annex VIII;
(b)
compile or verify the index to the information package;
(c)
issue the completed certificate, together with its attachments, to the applicant without unjustified delay.
4.   In the case of an EC type-approval in relation to which, in accordance with Articles 20 or 22 or Annex XI, restrictions have been imposed as to its validity, or certain provisions of the regulatory acts have been waived, the EC type-approval certificate shall specify those restrictions or waivers.
5.   Where particulars in the information folder specify provisions for special purpose vehicles as indicated in Annex XI, the EC type-approval certificate shall specify those provisions.
6.   Where the manufacturer chooses the mixed type-approval procedure, the approval authority shall complete, in Part III of the information document, the model for which is set out in Annex III, the references for the test reports, established by regulatory acts, for which no EC type-approval certificate is available.
7.   Where the manufacturer chooses the single-step type-approval procedure, the approval authority shall establish the list of applicable regulatory acts, the template of which is shown in the Appendix to Annex VI, and append that list to the EC type-approval certificate.
