Article 18
Certificate of conformity
1.   The manufacturer, in his capacity as the holder of an EC type-approval of a vehicle, shall deliver a certificate of conformity to accompany each vehicle, whether complete, incomplete or completed, that is manufactured in conformity with the approved vehicle type.
In the case of an incomplete or completed vehicle, the manufacturer shall complete only those items on side 2 of the certificate of conformity which have been added or changed at the current stage of approval and, if applicable, shall attach to the certificate all certificates of conformity delivered at the previous stage.
2.   The certificate of conformity shall be drawn up in one of the official languages of the Community. Any Member State may request the certificate of conformity to be translated into its own language or languages.
3.   The certificate of conformity shall be designed to prevent forgery. To that end, the paper used shall be protected either by coloured graphics or by a watermark in the form of the manufacturer’s identification mark.
4.   The certificate of conformity shall be completed in its entirety and shall not contain restrictions as regards the use of the vehicle other than those provided for in a regulatory act.
5.   The certificate of conformity as set out in Part I of Annex IX for vehicles approved in accordance with the provisions of Article 20(2) shall display in the title thereof the phrase ‘For complete/completed vehicles, type-approved in application of Article 20 (provisional approval).’.
6.   The certificate of conformity, as set out in Part I of Annex IX for vehicles type-approved in accordance with Article 22 shall display in the title thereof the phrase ‘For complete/completed vehicles type-approved in small series’, and in close proximity thereto the year of production followed by a sequential number, between 1 and the limit indicated in the table set out in Annex XII, denoting, in respect of each year of production, the position of that vehicle within the production allocated for that year.
7.   Without prejudice to the provisions of paragraph 1, the manufacturer may transmit data or information contained in the certificate of conformity by electronic mean to the registration authority of the Member State.
8.   A duplicate of the certificate of conformity may be issued only by the manufacturer. The word ‘duplicate’ must be clearly visible on the face of any duplicate certificate.
