Article 10
Market surveillance and control of the use of the EU Ecolabel
1.   Any false or misleading advertising or use of any label or logo which leads to confusion with the EU Ecolabel shall be prohibited.
2.   The competent body shall, in respect of products to which it has awarded the EU Ecolabel, verify that the product complies with the EU Ecolabel criteria and assessment requirements published under Article 8, on a regular basis. The competent body shall, as appropriate, also undertake such verifications upon complaint. These verifications may take the form of random spot-checks.
The competent body which has awarded the EU Ecolabel to the product shall inform the user of the EU Ecolabel of any complaints made concerning the product bearing the EU Ecolabel, and may request the user to reply to those complaints. The competent body may withhold the identity of the complainant from the user.
3.   The user of the EU Ecolabel shall allow the competent body which has awarded the EU Ecolabel to the product to undertake all necessary investigations to monitor its on-going compliance with the product group criteria and Article 9.
4.   The user of the EU Ecolabel shall, upon request by the competent body which has awarded the EU Ecolabel to the product, grant access to the premises on which the product concerned is produced.
The request may be made at any reasonable time and without notice.
5.   Where, after giving the user of the EU Ecolabel the opportunity to submit observations, any competent body which finds that a product bearing the EU Ecolabel does not comply with the relevant product group criteria or that the EU Ecolabel is not used in accordance with Article 9, it shall either prohibit the use of the EU Ecolabel on that product, or, in the event that the EU Ecolabel has been awarded by another competent body, it shall inform that competent body. The user of the EU Ecolabel shall not be entitled to repayment of the fees referred to in Article 9(4), either in whole or in part.
The competent body shall without delay inform all other competent bodies and the Commission of that prohibition.
6.   The competent body which has awarded the EU Ecolabel to the product shall not disclose, or use for any purpose unconnected with the award for use of the EU Ecolabel, information to which it has gained access in the course of assessing the compliance by a user of the EU Ecolabel with the rules on use of the EU Ecolabel set out in Article 9.
It shall take all reasonable steps to secure the protection of the documents provided to it against falsification and misappropriation.
