Article 270
Amendments to Regulation (EU) No 1296/2013
Regulation (EU) No 1296/2013 is amended as follows:
(1)
in Article 5, paragraph 2 is replaced by the following:
‘2.   The following indicative percentages shall apply on average over the whole period of the Programme to the axes set out in Article 3(1):
(a)
at least 55 % to the Progress axis;
(b)
at least 18 % to the EURES axis;
(c)
at least 18 % to the Microfinance and Social Entrepreneurship axis.’;
(2)
Article 14 is replaced by the following:
‘Article 14
Thematic sections and financing
1.   The Progress axis shall support actions in the thematic sections referred to in points (a), (b) and (c). Over the entire period of the Programme, the indicative breakdown of the overall allocation for the Progress axis between the different thematic sections shall respect the following minimum percentages:
(a)
employment, in particular to fight youth unemployment: 20 %;
(b)
social protection, social inclusion and the reduction and prevention of poverty: 45 %;
(c)
working conditions: 7 %.
Any remainder shall be allocated to one or more of the thematic sections referred to in point (a), (b) or (c) of the first subparagraph, or to a combination of them.
2.   From the overall allocation for the Progress axis, a significant share shall be allocated to the promotion of social experimentation as a method for testing and evaluating innovative solutions with a view to upscaling them.’;
(3)
Article 19 is replaced by the following:
‘Article 19
Thematic sections and financing
The EURES axis shall support actions in the thematic sections referred to in points (a), (b) and (c). Over the entire period of the Programme, the indicative breakdown of the overall allocation for the EURES axis between the different thematic sections shall respect the following minimum percentages:
(a)
transparency of job vacancies, applications and any related information for applicants and employers: 15 %;
(b)
development of services for the recruitment and placing of workers in employment through the clearance of job vacancies and applications at Union level, in particular targeted mobility schemes: 15 %;
(c)
cross-border partnerships: 18 %.
Any remainder shall be allocated to one or more of the thematic sections referred to in point (a), (b) or (c) of the first paragraph, or to a combination of them.’;
(4)
Article 25 is replaced by the following:
‘Article 25
Thematic sections and financing
The Microfinance and Social Entrepreneurship axis shall support actions in the thematic sections referred to in points (a) and (b). Over the entire period of the Programme, the indicative breakdown of the overall allocation for the Microfinance and Social Entrepreneurship axis between the different thematic sections shall respect the following minimum percentages:
(a)
microfinance for vulnerable groups and micro-enterprises: 35 %;
(b)
social entrepreneurship: 35 %.
Any remainder shall be allocated to the thematic sections referred to in point (a) or (b) of the first paragraph, or to a combination of them.’;
(5)
in Article 32, the second paragraph is replaced by the following:
‘The work programmes shall, where relevant, be for a three-year rolling period and shall contain a description of the actions to be financed, the procedures for selecting actions to be supported by the Union, the geographic coverage, the target audience and an indicative implementation time frame. The work programmes shall also include an indication of the amount allocated to each specific objective. The work programmes shall reinforce the coherence of the Programme by indicating the links between the three axes.’;
(6)
Articles 33 and 34 are deleted.
