Article 211
Provisioning of financial liabilities
1.   For budgetary guarantees and financial assistance to third countries, a basic act shall set out a provisioning rate as a percentage of the amount of the financial liability authorised. That amount shall exclude the contributions referred to in Article 208(2).
The basic act shall provide for the review of the provisioning rate at least every three years.
2.   The setting of a provisioning rate shall be guided by a qualitative and quantitative assessment by the Commission of the financial risks arising from a budgetary guarantee or a financial assistance to a third country in accordance with the principle of prudence, whereby assets and profits shall not be overestimated and liabilities and losses shall not be underestimated.
Unless otherwise specified in the basic act establishing the budgetary guarantee or financial assistance to a third country, the provisioning rate shall be based on the global provisioning needed in advance to cover the net expected losses and, in addition, an adequate safety buffer. Without prejudice to the powers of the European Parliament and of the Council, the global provisioning shall be constituted over the period of time foreseen in the relevant financial statement as referred to in Article 35.
3.   For a financial instrument provision shall be made, where appropriate, to respond to future payments related to a budgetary commitment of that financial instrument.
4.   The following resources shall contribute to the provisioning:
(a)
contributions from the budget, while fully respecting the regulation laying down the multiannual financial framework and after examination of the possibilities for redeployments;
(b)
returns on investments of the resources held in the common provisioning fund;
(c)
amounts recovered from defaulting debtors in accordance with the recovery procedure laid down in the guarantee or the loan agreement;
(d)
revenue and any other payments received by the Union in accordance with the guarantee or the loan agreement;
(e)
where applicable, contributions in cash by Member States and third parties pursuant to Article 208(2).
Only the resources referred to in points (a) to (d) of the first subparagraph of this paragraph shall be taken into account for calculating the provisioning resulting from the provisioning rate referred to in paragraph 1.
5.   Provisions shall be used for the payment of:
(a)
calls on the budgetary guarantee;
(b)
payment obligations related to a budgetary commitment for a financial instrument;
(c)
financial obligations arising from the borrowing of funds pursuant to Article 220(1);
(d)
where applicable, other expenses associated to the implementation of financial instruments, budgetary guarantees and financial assistance to third countries.
6.   Where the provisions for a budgetary guarantee exceed the amount of provisioning resulting from the provisioning rate referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article, resources referred to in points (b), (c) and (d) of the first subparagraph of paragraph 4 of this Article related to that guarantee shall be used within the limits of the eligible period provided for in the basic act, however, not beyond the constitution phase of the provisioning, and without prejudice to Article 213(4), to restore the budgetary guarantee up to its initial amount.
7.   The Commission shall immediately inform the European Parliament and the Council and may propose adequate replenishment measures or an increase of the provisioning rate where:
(a)
as a result of calls on a budgetary guarantee, the level of provisions for that budgetary guarantee falls below 50 % of the provisioning rate referred to in paragraph 1, and again where it falls below 30 % of that provisioning rate, or where it could fall below any of those percentages within a year according to a risk assessment by the Commission;
(b)
a country benefitting from financial assistance by the Union fails to pay on a maturity.
