Article 164
Procurement procedures
1.   Procurement procedures for awarding concession contracts or public contracts, including framework contracts shall take one of the following forms:
(a)
open procedure;
(b)
restricted procedure, including through a dynamic purchasing system;
(c)
design contest;
(d)
negotiated procedure, including without prior publication;
(e)
competitive dialogue;
(f)
competitive procedure with negotiation;
(g)
innovation partnership;
(h)
procedures involving a call for expression of interest.
2.   In open procedures any interested economic operator may submit a tender.
3.   In restricted procedures, competitive dialogues, competitive procedures with negotiation and innovation partnerships, any economic operator may submit a request to participate by providing the information that is requested by the contracting authority. The contracting authority shall invite all candidates, that satisfy the selection criteria and that are not in any of the situations referred to in Articles 136(1) and 141(1), to submit a tender.
Notwithstanding the first subparagraph, the contracting authority may limit the number of candidates to be invited to participate in the procedure on the basis of objective and non-discriminatory selection criteria, which shall be indicated in the contract notice or the call for expression of interest. The number of candidates invited shall be sufficient to ensure genuine competition.
4.   In all procedures involving negotiation, the contracting authority shall negotiate with tenderers the initial and any subsequent tenders or parts thereof, except their final tenders, in order to improve their content. The minimum requirements and the criteria specified in the procurement documents shall not be subject to negotiation.
A contracting authority may award a contract on the basis of the initial tender without negotiation where it has indicated in the procurement documents that it reserves the possibility to do so.
5.   The contracting authority may use:
(a)
the open or restricted procedure for any purchase;
(b)
the procedures involving a call for expression of interest for contracts with a value below the thresholds referred to in Article 175(1), to preselect candidates to be invited to submit tenders in response to future restricted invitations to tender, or to collect a list of vendors to be invited to submit requests to participate or submit tenders;
(c)
the design contest to acquire a plan or design selected by a jury after being put out to competition;
(d)
the innovation partnership to develop an innovative product, service or innovative works and for the subsequent purchase of the resulting supply, services or works;
(e)
the competitive procedure with negotiation or the competitive dialogue for concession contracts, for the service contracts referred to in Annex XIV to Directive 2014/24/EU, in cases where only irregular or unacceptable tenders were submitted in response to an open or restricted procedure after the initial procedure has been completed, and for cases where this is justified by the specific circumstances linked, inter alia, to the nature or the complexity of the subject matter of the contract or to the specific type of contract, as further detailed in Annex I to this Regulation;
(f)
the negotiated procedure for contracts with a value below the thresholds referred to in Article 175(1), or the negotiated procedure without prior publication for specific types of purchases falling outside the scope of Directive 2014/24/EU or in the clearly defined exceptional circumstances set out in Annex I to this Regulation.
6.   A dynamic purchasing system shall be open throughout its duration to any economic operator who satisfies the selection criteria.
The contracting authority shall follow the rules of the restricted procedure for procurement through a dynamic purchasing system.
