Article 44
Draft amending budgets
1.   The Commission may present draft amending budgets which are primarily revenue-driven in the following circumstances:
(a)
to enter in the budget the balance of the preceding financial year, in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 18;
(b)
to revise the forecast of own resources on the basis of updated economic forecasts;
(c)
to update the revised forecast of own resources and other revenue, as well as to review the availability of, and need for, payment appropriations.
If there are unavoidable, exceptional and unforeseen circumstances, in particular in view of the mobilisation of the European Union Solidarity Fund, the Commission may present draft amending budgets which are primarily expenditure-driven.
2.   Requests for amending budgets, in the same circumstances as referred to in paragraph 1, from Union institutions other than the Commission shall be sent to the Commission.
Before presenting a draft amending budget, the Commission and the other Union institutions concerned shall examine the scope for reallocation of the relevant appropriations, with particular reference to any expected under-implementation of appropriations.
Article 43 shall apply to amending budgets. Amending budgets shall be substantiated by reference to the budget the estimates of which they are amending.
3.   The Commission shall, except in duly justified exceptional circumstances or in the case of the mobilisation of the European Union Solidarity Fund for which a draft amending budget can be presented at any time of the year, submit its draft amending budgets simultaneously to the European Parliament and to the Council by 1 September of each financial year. It may attach an opinion to the requests for amending budgets from other Union institutions.
4.   Draft amending budgets shall be accompanied by statements of reasons and information on budget implementation for the preceding and current financial years available at the time of their establishment.
