Article 135
Protection of the financial interests of the Union by means of detection of risks, exclusion and imposition of financial penalties
1.   In order to protect the financial interests of the Union, the Commission shall set up and operate an early-detection and exclusion system.
The purpose of such a system shall be to facilitate:
(a)
the early detection of persons or entities referred to in paragraph 2, which pose a risk to the financial interests of the Union;
(b)
the exclusion of persons or entities referred to in paragraph 2, which are in one of the exclusion situations referred to in Article 136(1);
(c)
the imposition of a financial penalty on a recipient pursuant to Article 138.
2.   The early-detection and exclusion system shall apply to:
(a)
participants and recipients;
(b)
entities on whose capacity the candidate or tenderer intends to rely or subcontractors of a contractor;
(c)
any person or entity receiving Union funds where the budget is implemented pursuant to point (c) of the first subparagraph of Article 62(1) and to Article 154(4) on the basis of information notified in accordance with Article 155(6);
(d)
any person or entity receiving Union funds under financial instruments exceptionally implemented in accordance with point (a) of the first subparagraph of Article 62(1);
(e)
participants or recipients on which entities implementing the budget in accordance with Article 63 have provided information, as transmitted by Member States in accordance with sector-specific rules, in accordance with point (d) of Article 142(2);
(f)
sponsors as referred to in Article 26.
3.   The decision to register information concerning an early detection of the risks referred to in point (a) of the second subparagraph of paragraph 1 of this Article, to exclude persons or entities referred to in paragraph 2 and/or to impose a financial penalty on a recipient shall be taken by the authorising officer responsible. Information related to such decisions shall be registered in the database referred to in Article 142(1). Where such decisions are taken on the basis of Article 136(4), the information registered in the database shall include the information concerning the persons referred to in that paragraph.
4.   The decision to exclude persons or entities referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article or to impose financial penalties on a recipient shall be based on a final judgment or, in the exclusion situations referred to in Article 136(1), on a final administrative decision, or on a preliminary classification in law by the panel referred to in Article 143 in the situations referred to in Article 136(2) in order to ensure a centralised assessment of those situations. In the cases referred to in Article 141(1), the authorising officer responsible shall reject a participant from a given award procedure.
Without prejudice to Article 136(5), the authorising officer responsible may take a decision to exclude a participant or recipient and/or to impose a financial penalty on a recipient and a decision to publish the related information, on the basis of a preliminary classification as referred to in Article 136(2), only after having obtained a recommendation of the panel referred to in Article 143.
