Article 220
Rules and implementation
1.   Financial assistance by the Union to Member States or third countries shall be in accordance with pre-defined conditions and take the form of a loan or a credit line or any other instrument deemed appropriate to ensure the effectiveness of the support. To that end, the Commission shall be empowered, in the relevant basic act, to borrow the necessary funds on behalf of the Union on the capital markets or from financial institutions.
2.   The borrowing and lending shall not involve the Union in the transformation of maturities, or expose it to any interest risk or to any other commercial risk.
3.   The financial assistance shall be carried out in euro, except in duly justified cases.
4.   The financial assistance shall be directly implemented by the Commission.
5.   The Commission shall conclude an agreement with the beneficiary country that shall contain provisions:
(a)
ensuring that the beneficiary country regularly checks that the financing provided has been properly used in accordance with the pre-defined conditions, takes appropriate measures to prevent irregularities and fraud, and, if necessary, takes legal action to recover any funds provided under the financial assistance that have been misappropriated;
(b)
ensuring the protection of the financial interests of the Union;
(c)
expressly authorising the Commission, OLAF and the Court of Auditors, to exert their rights as foreseen by Article 129;
(d)
ensuring that the Union is entitled to early repayment of the loan where it has been established that, in relation to the management of the financial assistance, the beneficiary country has engaged in any act of fraud or corruption or any other illegal activity detrimental to the financial interests of the Union;
(e)
ensuring that all costs incurred by the Union that relate to a financial assistance shall be borne by the beneficiary country.
6.   The Commission shall release the loans, where possible in instalments, subject to the fulfilment of the conditions attached to the financial assistance. Where those conditions are not fulfilled, the Commission shall temporarily suspend or cancel the disbursement of the financial assistance.
7.   Funds raised but not yet disbursed cannot be used for any other goal than to provide financial assistance to the corresponding beneficiary country. Pursuant to Article 86(1) and (2), the accounting officer shall set up the procedures for the safekeeping of the funds.
TITLE XI

CONTRIBUTIONS TO EUROPEAN POLITICAL PARTIES

