Article 155
Implementation of Union funds and budgetary guarantees
1.   Persons and entities implementing Union funds or budgetary guarantees shall provide the Commission with:
(a)
a report on the implementation of Union funds or budgetary guarantees, including the fulfilment of the conditions or the achievement of results referred to in point (a) of the first subparagraph of Article 125(1);
(b)
where the contribution reimburses expenditure, their accounts drawn up for the expenditure incurred;
(c)
a management declaration covering the information referred to in point (a) and, where appropriate, point (b) confirming that:
(i)
the information is properly presented, complete and accurate;
(ii)
the Union funds were used for their intended purpose, as defined in the contribution agreements, financing agreements or guarantee agreements, or where applicable, in the relevant sector-specific rules;
(iii)
the control systems put in place give the necessary guarantees concerning the legality and regularity of the underlying transactions;
(d)
a summary of the final audit reports and of controls carried out, including an analysis of the nature and extent of errors and weaknesses identified in systems, as well as corrective action taken or planned.
Where cross-reliance on audits as referred to in Article 127 takes place, the summary referred to in point (d) of the first subparagraph of this paragraph shall include all relevant audit documentation to be relied upon.
For actions terminating before the end of the financial year concerned, the final report may replace the management declaration referred to in point (c) of the first subparagraph, provided it is submitted before 15 February of the following financial year.
The documents referred to in the first subparagraph shall be accompanied by an opinion of an independent audit body, drawn up in accordance with internationally accepted audit standards. That opinion shall establish whether the control systems put in place function properly and are cost-effective, and whether the underlying transactions are legal and regular. The opinion shall also state whether the audit work puts in doubt the assertions made in the management declaration referred to in point (c) of the first subparagraph. Where such an opinion is absent, the authorising officer may seek an equivalent level of assurance through other independent means.
The documents referred to in the first subparagraph shall be provided to the Commission no later than 15 February of the following financial year. The opinion referred to in the third subparagraph shall be provided to the Commission no later than 15 March of that year.
The obligations set out in this paragraph shall be without prejudice to agreements concluded with the EIB, the EIF, Member State organisations, international organisations and third countries. With regard to the management declaration, such agreements shall include at least the obligation of those entities to provide the Commission annually with a statement that, during the financial year concerned, the Union funds were used and accounted for in compliance with Article 154(3) and (4) and with the obligations laid down in such agreements. Such statement may be incorporated in the final report if the action implemented is limited to 18 months.
2.   When implementing Union funds, persons and entities shall:
(a)
comply with applicable Union law and agreed international and Union standards and, therefore, not support actions that contribute to money laundering, terrorism financing, tax avoidance, tax fraud or tax evasion;
(b)
when implementing financial instruments and budgetary guarantees in accordance with Title X, not enter into new or renewed operations with entities incorporated or established in jurisdictions listed under the relevant Union policy on non-cooperative jurisdictions or that are identified as high-risk third countries pursuant to Article 9(2) of Directive (EU) 2015/849, or that do not effectively comply with Union or internationally agreed tax standards on transparency and exchange of information.
Entities may derogate from point (b) of the first subparagraph only if the action is physically implemented in one of those jurisdictions, and does not present any indication that the relevant operation falls under any of the categories listed in point (a) of the first subparagraph.
When concluding agreements with financial intermediaries, entities implementing financial instruments and budgetary guarantees in accordance with Title X shall transpose the requirements referred to in this paragraph into the relevant agreements and shall request the financial intermediaries to report on their observance.
3.   When implementing financial instruments and budgetary guarantees in accordance with Title X, persons and entities shall apply the principles and standards set out in Union law on the prevention of the use of the financial system for the purpose of money laundering and terrorist financing, in particular Regulation (EU) 2015/847 of the European Parliament and of the Council (53) and Directive (EU) 2015/849. They shall make funding under this Regulation contingent upon the disclosure of beneficial ownership information in accordance with Directive (EU) 2015/849 and publish country-by-country reporting data within the meaning of Article 89(1) of Directive 2013/36/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council (54).
4.   The Commission shall verify that the Union funds or budgetary guarantees have been used in accordance with the conditions laid down in the relevant agreements. Where the costs of the person or entity are reimbursed based on a simplified cost option in accordance with points (c), (d) and (e) of the first subparagraph of Article 125(1), Article 181(1) to (5) and Articles 182 to 185 shall apply mutatis mutandis. Where Union funds or budgetary guarantees have been used in breach of the obligations laid down in the relevant agreements, Article 131 shall apply.
5.   In multi-donor actions, where the Union contribution reimburses expenditure, the procedure set out in paragraph 4 shall consist in verifying that an amount corresponding to that paid by the Commission for the action concerned has been used by the person or entity in accordance with the conditions laid down in the relevant grant, contribution or financing agreement.
6.   Contribution agreements, financing agreements and guarantee agreements shall clearly define the responsibilities and obligations of the person or entity implementing Union funds, including the obligations set out in Article 129 and the conditions for payment of the contribution. Such agreements shall also, where applicable, define the mutually agreed remuneration which shall be commensurate with the conditions under which the actions are implemented, taking due account of situations of crisis and fragility, and, where appropriate, be performance-based. Those agreements shall also include rules on reporting to the Commission on how the tasks are performed, the results expected, including indicators on measuring performance, and the obligation for persons or entities implementing Union funds to notify the Commission without delay of cases of detected fraud and irregularities and their follow-up.
7.   All contribution agreements, financing agreements and guarantee agreements shall be made available to the European Parliament and to the Council at their request.
8.   This Article shall not apply to the Union contribution to Union bodies which are subject to a separate discharge procedure under Articles 70 and 71, with the exception of possible ad-hoc contribution agreements.
