Article 47
Budget nomenclature
1.   Commission revenue and the revenue and expenditure of the other Union institutions shall be classified by the European Parliament and by the Council according to their type or the use to which they are assigned under titles, chapters, articles and items.
2.   The statement of expenditure for the section of the budget relating to the Commission shall be set out on the basis of a nomenclature adopted by the European Parliament and by the Council and classified according to the purpose of the expenditure.
Each title shall correspond to a policy area and each chapter shall, as a rule, correspond to a programme or an activity.
Each title may include operational appropriations and administrative appropriations. The administrative appropriations for a title shall be grouped in a single chapter.
The budget nomenclature shall comply with the principles of specification, sound financial management and transparency. It shall provide the clarity and transparency necessary for the budgetary process, facilitating the identification of the main objectives as reflected in the relevant legal bases, making choices on political priorities possible and enabling efficient and effective implementation.
3.   The Commission may request the addition of a token entry pro memoria on an entry without authorised appropriations. Such a request shall be approved in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 31.
4.   When presented by purpose, administrative appropriations for individual titles shall be classified as follows:
(a)
expenditure on staff authorised in the establishment plan, which shall include an amount of appropriations and a number of establishment plan posts corresponding to that expenditure;
(b)
expenditure on external personnel and other expenditure referred to in point (b) of the first subparagraph of Article 30(1) and financed under the ‘administration’ heading of the multiannual financial framework;
(c)
expenditure on buildings and other related expenditure, including cleaning and maintenance, rental and hiring, telecommunications, water, gas and electricity;
(d)
expenditure on external personnel and technical assistance directly linked to the implementation of programmes.
Any administrative expenditure of the Commission of a type which is common to several titles shall be set out in a separate summary statement classified by type.
