Article 140
Publication of exclusion and financial penalties
1.   In order to, where necessary, reinforce the deterrent effect of the exclusion and/or financial penalty, the Commission shall, subject to a decision of the authorising officer responsible, publish on its website the following information related to the exclusion and, where applicable, the financial penalty in the cases referred to in points (c) to (h) of Article 136(1):
(a)
the name of the person or entity referred to in Article 135(2) concerned;
(b)
the exclusion situation;
(c)
the duration of the exclusion and/or the amount of the financial penalty.
Where the decision on the exclusion and/or financial penalty has been taken on the basis of a preliminary classification as referred to in Article 136(2), the publication shall indicate that there is no final judgment or, where applicable, final administrative decision. In such cases, information about any appeals, their status and their outcome, as well as any revised decision of the authorising officer responsible shall be published without delay. Where a financial penalty has been imposed, the publication shall also indicate whether that penalty has been paid.
The decision to publish the information shall be taken by the authorising officer responsible either following the relevant final judgment or, where applicable, final administrative decision, or following the recommendation of the panel referred to in Article 143, as the case may be. That decision shall take effect three months after its notification to the person or entity concerned, as referred to in Article 135(2).
The information published shall be removed as soon as the exclusion has come to an end. In the case of a financial penalty, the publication shall be removed six months after payment of that penalty.
Where personal data are concerned, the authorising officer responsible shall in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 45/2001 inform the person or entity concerned, as referred to in Article 135(2) of this Regulation, of their rights under the applicable data protection rules and of the procedures available for exercising those rights.
2.   The information referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article shall not be published in any of the following circumstances:
(a)
where it is necessary to preserve the confidentiality of an investigation or of national judicial proceedings;
(b)
where publication would cause disproportionate damage to the person or entity referred to in Article 135(2) concerned or would otherwise be disproportionate on the basis of the proportionality criteria set out in Article 136(3) and having regard to the amount of the financial penalty;
(c)
where a natural person is concerned, unless the publication of personal data is justified by exceptional circumstances, inter alia, by the seriousness of the conduct or its impact on the financial interests of the Union. In such cases, the decision to publish the information shall duly take into consideration the right to privacy and other rights provided for in Regulation (EC) No 45/2001.
