Article 212
Common provisioning fund
1.   The provisions made to cover the financial liabilities arising from financial instruments, budgetary guarantees or financial assistance shall be held in a common provisioning fund.
By 30 June 2019, the Commission shall submit to the European Parliament and to the Council an independent external evaluation of the advantages and disadvantages of entrusting the financial management of the assets of the common provisioning fund to the Commission, to the EIB, or to a combination of the two, taking into account the relevant technical and institutional criteria used in comparing asset management services, including the technical infrastructure, a comparison of costs for the services provided, the institutional set-up, reporting, performance, accountability and expertise of the Commission and the EIB and the other asset management mandates for the budget. The evaluation shall, where appropriate, be accompanied by a legislative proposal.
2.   Global profits or losses from the investment of the resources held in the common provisioning fund shall be allocated proportionately among the respective financial instruments, budgetary guarantees or financial assistance.
The financial manager of the resources of the common provisioning fund shall keep a minimum amount of resources of the fund in cash or cash equivalents in accordance with prudential rules and the forecasts for payments provided by the authorising officers of the financial instruments, budgetary guarantees or financial assistance.
The financial manager of the resources of the common provisioning fund may enter into repurchase agreements, with the resources of the common provisioning fund as collateral, to make payments out of the fund where this procedure is reasonably expected to be more beneficial for the budget than the divestment of resources within the timeframe of the payment request. The duration or roll-over period of repurchase agreements related to a payment shall be limited to the minimum necessary to minimise a loss for the budget.
3.   Pursuant to point (d) of the first subparagraph of Article 77(1) and Article 86(1) and (2), the accounting officer shall set up the procedures to be applied to the revenue and expenditure operations and, in agreement with the financial manager of the resources of the common provisioning fund, to the assets and liabilities related to the common provisioning fund.
4.   In the exceptional cases where the Commission has made a transfer as referred to in point (g) of the first subparagraph of Article 30(1), the Commission shall immediately inform the European Parliament and the Council thereof, and shall urgently propose the measures necessary to restore the budgetary item of the guarantee from which the transfer was made, while fully respecting the ceilings provided for in the regulation laying down the multiannual financial framework.
