Article 99
Default interest
1.   Without prejudice to any specific provisions deriving from the application of specific regulations, any amount receivable not repaid on the deadline referred to in point (b) of the first subparagraph of Article 98(4) shall bear interest in accordance with paragraphs 2 and 3 of this Article.
2.   Except in the case referred to in paragraph 4 of this Article, the interest rate for amounts receivable not repaid on the deadline referred to in point (b) of the first subparagraph of Article 98(4) shall be the rate applied by the European Central Bank to its principal refinancing operations, as published in the C series of the Official Journal of the European Union, in force on the first calendar day of the month in which the deadline falls, increased by:
(a)
eight percentage points where the obligating event is a supply contract or a service contract;
(b)
three and a half percentage points in all other cases.
3.   Interest shall be calculated from the calendar day following the deadline referred to in point (b) of the first subparagraph of Article 98(4) up to the calendar day on which the debt is repaid in full.
The recovery order corresponding to the amount of the default interest shall be issued when that interest is actually received.
4.   In the case of fines or other penalties, the interest rate for amounts receivable not paid within the deadline referred to in point (b) of the first subparagraph of Article 98(4) shall be the rate applied by the European Central Bank to its principal refinancing operations, as published in the C series of the Official Journal of the European Union, in force on the first calendar day of the month in which the decision imposing a fine or other penalty has been adopted, increased by:
(a)
one and a half percentage points where the debtor provides a financial guarantee which is accepted by the accounting officer instead of payment;
(b)
three and a half percentage points in all other cases.
Where the Court of Justice of the European Union, in the exercise of its competence under Article 261 TFEU, increases the amount of a fine or other penalty, interest on the amount of the increase shall run from the date of the judgment of the Court.
5.   In cases where the overall interest rate would be negative it shall be set at zero percent.
