Article 76
Powers and duties of Heads of Union Delegations
1.   Where Heads of Union delegations act as authorising officers by subdelegation in accordance with Article 60(2), they shall be subject to the Commission as the Union institution responsible for the definition, exercise, monitoring and appraisal of their duties and responsibilities as authorising officers by subdelegation and shall cooperate closely with the Commission with regard to the proper implementation of the funds, in order to ensure, in particular, the legality and regularity of financial transactions, respect for the principle of sound financial management in the management of the funds and the effective protection of the financial interests of the Union. They shall be subject to the internal rules of the Commission and to the Commission Charter for the implementation of the financial management tasks subdelegated to them. They may be assisted in their duties by Commission staff of Union delegations.
To this effect, Heads of Union delegations shall take the measures necessary to prevent any situation likely to put at risk the Commission’s capacity to fulfil its responsibility for budget implementation subdelegated to them, as well as any conflict of priorities which is likely to have an impact on the implementation of the financial management tasks subdelegated to them.
Where a situation or conflict referred to in the second subparagraph arises, Heads of Union delegations shall without delay inform the Directors-General responsible of the Commission and of the EEAS thereof. Those Directors-General shall take appropriate steps to remedy the situation.
2.   If Heads of Union delegations find themselves in a situation as referred to in Article 74(8), they shall refer the matter to the panel referred to in Article 143. In the event of any illegal activity, fraud or corruption which may harm the interests of the Union, they shall inform the authorities and bodies designated by the applicable legislation.
3.   Heads of Union delegations acting as authorising officers by subdelegation in accordance with Article 60(2) shall report to their authorising officer by delegation so that the latter can integrate their reports in his or her annual activity report referred to in Article 74(9). The reports of Heads of Union delegations shall include information on the efficiency and effectiveness of internal control systems put in place in their delegation, as well as on the management of operations subdelegated to them, and provide the assurance referred to in the third subparagraph of Article 92(5). Those reports shall be annexed to the annual activity report of the authorising officer by delegation, and shall be made available to the European Parliament and to the Council having due regard, where appropriate, to their confidentiality.
Heads of Union delegations shall fully cooperate with Union institutions involved in the discharge procedure and provide, as appropriate, any necessary additional information. In this context, they may be requested to attend meetings of the relevant bodies and assist the authorising officer by delegation responsible.
Heads of Union delegations acting as authorising officers by subdelegation in accordance with Article 60(2) shall reply to any request by the authorising officer by delegation of the Commission at the Commission’s own request or, in the context of discharge, at the request of the European Parliament.
The Commission shall ensure that the subdelegating of powers to Heads of Union delegations is not detrimental to the discharge procedure under Article 319 TFEU.
4.   Paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 shall also apply to deputy Heads of Union delegations when they act as authorising officers by subdelegation in the absence of Heads of Union delegations.
