Article 200
Evaluation procedure
1.   Proposals shall be evaluated, on the basis of the pre-announced selection and award criteria, with a view to determining which proposals may be financed.
2.   The authorising officer responsible shall, where appropriate, divide the process into several procedural stages. The rules governing the process shall be announced in the call for proposals.
The applicants whose proposals are rejected at any stage shall be informed in accordance with paragraph 7.
The same documents and information shall not be required more than once during the same procedure.
3.   The evaluation committee referred to in Article 150 or, where appropriate, the authorising officer responsible may ask an applicant to provide additional information or to clarify the supporting documents submitted in accordance with Article 151. The authorising officer shall keep appropriate records of contacts with applicants during the procedure.
4.   Upon completion of its work, the members of the evaluation committee shall sign a record of all the proposals examined, containing an assessment of their quality and identifying those which may receive funding.
Where necessary that record shall rank the proposals examined, provide recommendations on the maximum amount to award and possible non-substantial adjustments to the grant application.
The record shall be kept for future reference.
5.   The authorising officer responsible may invite an applicant to adjust its proposal in the light of the recommendations of the evaluation committee. The authorising officer responsible shall keep appropriate records of contacts with applicants during the procedure.
6.   The authorising officer responsible shall, on the basis of the evaluation, take his or her decision giving at least:
(a)
the subject and the overall amount of the decision;
(b)
the names of the successful applicants, the title of the actions, the amounts accepted and the reasons for that choice, including where it is inconsistent with the opinion of the evaluation committee;
(c)
the names of any applicants rejected and the reasons for that rejection.
7.   The authorising officer responsible shall inform applicants in writing of the decision on their application. If the grant requested is not awarded, the Union institution concerned shall give the reasons for the rejection of the application. Rejected applicants shall be informed as soon as possible of the outcome of the evaluation of their application and in any case within 15 calendar days after information has been sent to the successful applicants.
8.   For grants awarded pursuant to Article 195, the authorising officer responsible may:
(a)
decide not to apply paragraphs 2 and 4 of this Article and Article 150;
(b)
merge the content of the evaluation report and the award decision into a single document and sign it.
