Article 255
Rules and procedure on the audit
1.   The examination by the Court of Auditors of whether all revenue has been received and all expenditure incurred in a lawful and proper manner shall have regard to the Treaties, the budget, this Regulation, the delegated acts adopted pursuant to this Regulation and all other relevant acts adopted pursuant to the Treaties. That examination may take account of the multiannual character of programmes and related supervisory and control systems.
2.   In the performance of its task, the Court of Auditors shall be entitled to consult, in the manner provided for in Article 257, all documents and information relating to the financial management by departments or bodies with regard to operations financed or co-financed by the Union. It shall have the power to hear any official responsible for a revenue or expenditure operation and to use any of the auditing procedures appropriate to those departments or bodies. The audit in Member States shall be carried out in liaison with the national audit institutions or, where they do not have the necessary powers, with the competent national departments. The Court of Auditors and the national audit institutions of Member States shall cooperate in a spirit of trust while maintaining their independence.
In order to obtain all the necessary information for the performance of the task entrusted to it by the Treaties or by acts adopted pursuant to them, the Court of Auditors may be present, at its request, during the audit operations carried out within the framework of budget implementation by, or on behalf of, any Union institution.
At the request of the Court of Auditors, each Union institution shall authorise financial institutions holding Union deposits to enable the Court of Auditors to ensure that external data tally with the accounts.
3.   In order to perform its task, the Court of Auditors shall notify Union institutions and the authorities to which this Regulation applies of the names of the members of its staff who are empowered to audit them.
