Article 114
Time limits for commitments
1.   Without prejudice to Articles 111(2) and 264(3), legal commitments relating to individual or provisional budgetary commitments shall be entered into by 31 December of year n, year n being the one in which the budgetary commitment was made.
2.   Global budgetary commitments shall cover the total cost of the corresponding legal commitments entered into up to 31 December of year n+1.
Where the global budgetary commitment gives rise to the award of a prize referred to in Title IX, the legal commitment referred to in Article 207(4) shall be entered into by 31 December of year n+3.
In external actions, where the global budgetary commitment gives rise to a financing agreement concluded with a third country, the financing agreement shall be concluded by 31 December of year n+1. In that case, the global budgetary commitment shall cover the total costs of legal commitments implementing the financing agreement entered into within a period of three years following the date of conclusion of the financing agreement.
However, in the following cases, the global budgetary commitment shall cover the total costs of legal commitments entered into until the end of the period of implementation of the financing agreement:
(a)
multi-donor actions;
(b)
blending operations;
(c)
legal commitments relating to audit and evaluation;
(d)
the following exceptional circumstances:
(i)
modifications made to legal commitments which have already been entered into;
(ii)
legal commitments that are to be entered into after early termination of an existing legal commitment;
(iii)
changes of the implementing entity.
3.   The third and fourth subparagraphs of paragraph 2 shall not apply to the following multiannual programmes that are implemented through split commitments:
(a)
the Instrument for Pre-accession Assistance established by Regulation (EU) No 231/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council (41);
(b)
the European Neighbourhood Instrument established by Regulation (EU) No 232/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council (42).
In the cases referred to in the first subparagraph, the appropriations shall be automatically decommitted by the Commission in accordance with sector-specific rules.
4.   The individual and provisional budgetary commitments for actions extending over more than one financial year shall, except in the case of staff expenditure, have a final date for implementation set, in accordance with the conditions in the legal commitments to which they refer, and taking into account the principle of sound financial management.
5.   Any parts of budgetary commitments which have not been implemented by payments six months after the final date for implementation shall be decommitted.
6.   The amount of a budgetary commitment for which no payment within the meaning of Article 115 has been made within two years of the entering into the legal commitment shall be decommitted, except where that amount relates to a case under litigation before judicial courts or arbitral bodies, where the legal commitment takes the form of a financing agreement with a third country or where there are special provisions laid down in sector-specific rules.
