Article 152
Guarantees
1.   With the exception of contracts and grants the value of which does not exceed EUR 60 000, the authorising officer responsible may, if proportionate and subject to the authorising officer’s risk analysis, require a guarantee to be lodged:
(a)
by contractors or beneficiaries in order to limit the financial risks connected with a payment of pre-financing (‘guarantee on pre-financing’);
(b)
by contractors to ensure compliance with substantial contractual obligations in the case of works, supplies or complex services (‘performance guarantee’);
(c)
by contractors to ensure full performance of the contract during the contract liability period (‘retention money guarantee’).
The JRC shall be exempted from lodging guarantees.
As an alternative to requesting a guarantee on pre-financing, for grants, the authorising officer responsible may decide to split the payment into several instalments.
2.   The authorising officer responsible shall decide whether the guarantee is to be denominated in euro or in the currency of the contract or of the grant agreement.
3.   The guarantee shall be issued by a bank or by an authorised financial institution accepted by the authorising officer responsible.
At the request of the contractor or the beneficiary and provided it is accepted by the authorising officer responsible:
(a)
the guarantees referred to points (a), (b) and (c) of the first subparagraph of paragraph 1 may be replaced by a joint and several guarantee of the contractor or the beneficiary and a third party;
(b)
the guarantee referred to in point (a) of the first subparagraph of paragraph 1 may be replaced by an irrevocable and unconditional joint guarantee of the beneficiaries who are parties to the same grant agreement.
4.   The guarantee shall have the effect of making the bank or financial institution or the third party provide irrevocable collateral security, or stand as first-call guarantor of the contractor’s or beneficiary’s obligations.
5.   Where, in the course of implementation of the contract or the grant agreement, the authorising officer responsible discovers that a guarantor is not or is no longer authorised to issue guarantees in accordance with the applicable national law, he or she shall require that the contractor or the beneficiary replaces the guarantee issued by such a guarantor.
