Article 196
Content of grant applications
1.   The grant application shall contain the following:
(a)
information on the legal status of the applicant;
(b)
a declaration on the applicant’s honour in accordance with Article 137(1) and on compliance with the eligibility and selection criteria;
(c)
information necessary to demonstrate the applicant’s financial and operational capacity to carry out the proposed action or work programme and, if decided by the authorising officer responsible on the basis of a risk assessment, supporting documents confirming that information, such as the profit and loss account and the balance sheet for up to the three last financial years for which the accounts were closed;
Such information and supporting documents shall not be requested from applicants to which the verification of the financial or operational capacity does not apply in accordance with Article 198(5) or (6). In addition, supporting documents shall not be requested for low value grants;
(d)
where the application concerns a grant for an action for which the amount exceeds EUR 750 000 or an operating grant which exceeds EUR 100 000, an audit report produced by an approved external auditor, where it is available, and always in cases where a statutory audit is required by Union or national law, certifying the accounts for up to the last three available financial years. In all other cases, the applicant shall provide a self-declaration signed by its authorised representative certifying the validity of its accounts for up to the last three available financial years;
The first subparagraph shall apply only to the first application made by a beneficiary to an authorising officer responsible in any one financial year.
In the case of agreements between the Commission and a number of beneficiaries, the thresholds set in the first subparagraph shall apply to each beneficiary.
In the case of partnerships referred to in Article 130(4), the audit report referred to in the first subparagraph of this point, covering the last two financial years available, must be produced before signature of the financial framework partnership agreement.
The authorising officer responsible may, depending on a risk assessment, waive the obligation referred to in the first subparagraph for education and training establishments and, in the case of agreements with a number of beneficiaries, beneficiaries who have accepted joint and several liabilities or who do not bear any financial responsibility.
The first subparagraph shall not apply to persons and entities eligible under indirect management to the extent that they comply with the conditions specified in point (c) of the first subparagraph of Article 62(1) and in Article 154;
(e)
a description of the action or work programme and an estimated budget, which:
(i)
shall have revenue and expenditure in balance; and
(ii)
shall indicate the estimated eligible costs of the action or work programme.
Points (i) and (ii) shall not apply to multi-donor actions.
By way of derogation from point (i), in duly justified cases, the estimated budget may include provisions for contingencies or possible variations in exchange rates;
(f)
indication of the sources and amounts of Union funding received or applied for in respect of the same action or part of the action or for the functioning of the applicant during the same financial year as well as any other funding received or applied for the same action.
2.   The application may be divided in several parts that may be submitted at different stages in accordance with Article 200(2).
