Article 168
Submission, electronic communication and evaluation
1.   The contracting authority shall lay down time limits for the receipt of tenders and requests to participate in accordance with point 24 of Annex I and taking into account the complexity of the purchase, leaving an adequate period for economic operators to prepare their tenders.
2.   If deemed appropriate and proportionate, the contracting authority may require tenderers to lodge a guarantee to make sure that the tenders submitted are not withdrawn before contract signature. The required guarantee shall represent 1 to 2 % of the total estimated value of the contract.
The contracting authority shall release the guarantees:
(a)
in respect of tenderers or tenders rejected as referred to in point 30.2(b) or (c) of Annex I, after having provided the information on the outcome of the procedure;
(b)
in respect of tenderers ranked as referred to in point 30.2(e) of Annex I, after the contract is signed.
3.   The contracting authority shall open all requests to participate and tenders. However, it shall reject:
(a)
requests to participate and tenders which do not comply with the time limit for receipt, without opening them;
(b)
tenders already open when they are received, without examining their content.
4.   The contracting authority shall evaluate all requests to participate or tenders not rejected during the opening phase as laid down in paragraph 3 on the basis of the criteria specified in the procurement documents with a view to awarding the contract or to proceeding with an electronic auction.
5.   The authorising officer may waive the appointment of an evaluation committee as provided for in Article 150(2) in the following cases:
(a)
the value of the contract is below the thresholds referred to in Article 175(1);
(b)
on the basis of a risk analysis for the cases referred to in points (c), (e), (f)(i), (f)(iii) and (h) of the second subparagraph of point 11.1 of Annex I;
(c)
on the basis of a risk analysis when reopening competition within a framework contract;
(d)
for procedures in the field of external actions having a value of less than or equal to EUR 20 000.
6.   Requests to participate and tenders which do not comply with all the minimum requirements set out in the procurement documents shall be rejected.
