Article 4
General financing provisions
1.   The Union's financial assistance may be provided through the types of financing envisaged by Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012, and in particular:
(a)
grants;
(b)
procurement contracts for services, supplies or works;
(c)
general or sector budget support;
(d)
contributions to trust funds set up by the Commission, in accordance with Article 187 of Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012;
(e)
financial instruments such as loans, guarantees, equity or quasi-equity, investments or participations, and risk-sharing instruments, whenever possible under the lead of the EIB in line with its external mandate under Decision No 1080/2011/EU, a multilateral European financial institution, such as the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, or a bilateral European financial institution, e.g. bilateral development banks, possibly pooled with additional grants from other sources.
2.   General or sector budget support as referred to in point (c) of paragraph 1 is based on mutual accountability and shared commitments to universal values, and aims at strengthening contractual partnerships between the Union and partner countries in order to promote democracy, human rights and the rule of law, support sustainable and inclusive economic growth and eradicate poverty.
Any decision to provide the general or sector budget support shall be based on budget support policies agreed by the Union, a clear set of eligibility criteria and a careful assessment of the risks and benefits.
One of the key determinants of that decision shall be an assessment of the commitment, record and progress of partner countries with regard to democracy, human rights and the rule of law. The general or sector budget support shall be differentiated in such a way as to respond better to the political, economic and social context of the partner country, taking into account situations of fragility.
When providing the general or sector budget support in accordance with Article 186 of Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012, the Commission shall clearly define and monitor its conditionality, and shall support the development of parliamentary control and audit capacities and increased transparency and public access to information. Disbursement of the general or sector budget support shall be conditional on satisfactory progress being made towards achieving the objectives agreed with the partner country.
3.   Any entity entrusted with the implementation of the financial instruments as referred to in point (e) of paragraph 1 shall fulfil the requirements of Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012 and comply with Union objectives, standards and policies, as well as best practices regarding the use of and reporting on Union funds.
Those financial instruments may be grouped into facilities for implementation and reporting purposes.
The Union's financial assistance may also be provided, in accordance with Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012, through contributions to international, regional or national funds, such as those established or managed by the EIB, by Member States, by partner countries and regions or by international organisations, with a view to attracting joint financing from a number of donors, or to funds set up by one or more donors for the purpose of the joint implementation of projects.
4.   Reciprocal access by Union financial institutions to financial instruments set up by other organisations shall be promoted, as appropriate.
5.   When providing the Union's financial assistance as referred to in paragraph 1, the Commission shall, where appropriate, take all necessary measures in order to ensure the visibility of the Union's financial support. Those shall include measures imposing visibility requirements on recipients of Union funds, except in duly justified cases. The Commission shall be responsible for monitoring recipients' compliance with those requirements.
6.   All revenue generated by a financial instrument shall be assigned to the corresponding Instrument as internal assigned revenue. Every five years, the Commission shall examine the contribution made to the achievement of Union objectives, and the effectiveness, of existing financial instruments.
7.   The Union's financial assistance shall be implemented by the Commission, as provided for by Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012, directly by Commission departments, by Union delegations and by executive agencies, by shared management with Member States or indirectly by entrusting budget implementation tasks to the entities listed in Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012. Those entities shall ensure consistency with the Union's external policy and may entrust budget implementation tasks to other entities under conditions equivalent to those applying to the Commission.
They shall annually fulfil their obligation under Article 60(5) of Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012. The audit opinion, where required, shall be submitted within one month of the report and management declaration, to be taken into account in the assurance of the Commission.
International organisations as referred to in point (c)(ii) of Article 58(1)) of Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012 and bodies of the Member States as referred to in points (c)(v) and (vi) of Article 58(1) of that Regulation which have been entrusted by the Commission may also entrust budget implementation tasks to non-profit organisations possessing the appropriate operational and financial capacity, under conditions equivalent to those applying to the Commission.
Entities which fulfil the criteria laid down in Article 60(2) of Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012 shall be deemed to meet the selection criteria referred to in Article 139 of that Regulation.
8.   The types of financing referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article and in Article 6(1), and the methods of implementation referred to in paragraph 3 of this Article, shall be chosen on the basis of their ability to achieve the specific objectives of the actions and to deliver results, taking into account, in particular, the costs of controls, the administrative burden, and the expected risk of non-compliance. For grants, this shall include consideration of the use of lump sums, flat rates and scales of unit costs.
9.   Actions financed under the Instruments may be implemented by means of parallel or joint co-financing.
In the case of parallel co-financing, an action is split into a number of clearly identifiable components which are each financed by the different partners providing co-financing in such a way that the end-use of the financing can always be identified.
In the case of joint co-financing, the total cost of an action is shared between the partners providing the co-financing and the resources are pooled in such a way that it is no longer possible to identify the source of financing for any given activity undertaken as part of the action. In such a case, ex-post publicity of grant and procurement contracts as provided for by Article 35 of Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012 shall comply with the rules, if any, governing the entrusted entity.
10.   When recourse is had to a type of financing referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article or Article 6(1), cooperation between the Union and its partners may take the form, inter alia, of:
(a)
triangular arrangements whereby the Union coordinates with third countries its assistance to a partner country or region;
(b)
administrative cooperation measures such as twinning between public institutions, local authorities, national public bodies or private law entities entrusted with public service tasks of a Member State and those of a partner country or region, as well as cooperation measures involving public-sector experts dispatched from the Member States and their regional and local authorities;
(c)
contributions to the necessary costs of setting up and administering a public-private partnership;
(d)
sector policy support programmes whereby the Union provides support to a partner country's sector programme;
(e)
in the case of the ENI and IPA II, contributions to the cost of the countries' participation in Union programmes and agencies;
(f)
interest rate subsidies;
(g)
financing through grants to Union agencies.
11.   When working with stakeholders of beneficiary countries, the Commission shall take into account their specificities, including needs and context, when defining the modalities of financing, the type of contribution, the award modalities and the administrative provisions for the management of grants, with a view to reaching and best responding to the widest possible range of such stakeholders. Specific modalities shall be encouraged in accordance with Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012, such as partnership agreements, authorisations of subgranting, direct award or eligibility-restricted calls for proposals or lump sums.
12.   In implementing its support to transition and reform in partner countries, the Union shall, where appropriate, draw on and share the experiences of Member States and lessons learnt.
