Article 8
Common rules
1.   Participation in the award of procurement contracts and in grant and other award procedures for actions financed under this Regulation for the benefit of third parties shall be open to all natural persons who are nationals of, and legal persons which are effectively established in, an eligible country as defined for the applicable Instrument under this Title, and to international organisations.
Legal persons may include civil society organisations, such as non-governmental non-profit organisations and independent political foundations, community-based organisations and private-sector non-profit agencies, institutions and organisations and networks thereof at local, national, regional and international level.
2.   In the case of actions jointly co-financed with a partner or other donor or implemented through a Member State in shared management, or through a trust fund established by the Commission, countries which are eligible under the rules of that partner, other donor or Member State or determined in the constitutive act of the trust fund shall also be eligible.
In the case of actions implemented through one of the entrusted bodies in indirect management within a category listed in points (c)(ii) to (c)(viii) of Article 58 (1) of Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012, countries which are eligible under the rules of the body concerned shall also be eligible.
3.   In the case of actions financed by one of the Instruments and, in addition, by another Union instrument for external action, including the European Development Fund, the countries identified under any of those instruments shall be considered eligible for the purpose of those actions.
In the case of actions of a global, regional or cross-border nature financed by one of the Instruments, the countries, territories and regions covered by the action may be considered eligible for the purpose of that action.
4.   All supplies purchased under a procurement contract, or in accordance with a grant agreement, financed under this Regulation shall originate from an eligible country. However, they may originate from any country when the amount of the supplies to be purchased is below the threshold for the use of the competitive negotiated procedure. For the purposes of this Regulation, the term ‘origin’ is defined in Article 23 and 24 of Council Regulation (EEC) No 2913/92 (21) and other legislative acts of the Union governing non-preferential origin.
5.   The rules under this Title do not apply to, and do not create nationality restrictions for, natural persons employed or otherwise legally contracted by an eligible contractor or, where applicable, subcontractor.
6.   In order to promote local capacities, markets and purchases, priority shall be given to local and regional contractors when Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012 provides for an award on the basis of a single tender. In all other cases, participation of local and regional contractors shall be promoted in accordance with the relevant provisions of that Regulation.
7.   Eligibility as set out in this Title, may be restricted with regard to the nationality, geographical location or nature of applicants, where such restrictions are required on account of the specific nature and the objectives of the action and where they are necessary for its effective implementation. Such restrictions may apply in particular to participation in award procedures in the case of cross-border cooperation actions.
8.   Natural and legal persons who have been awarded contracts shall comply with applicable environmental legislation including multilateral environmental agreements, as well as internationally agreed core labour standards (22).
