Article 17
Mid-term review and evaluation of the Instruments
1.   No later than 31 December 2017, a mid-term review report shall be submitted by the Commission on the implementation of each of the Instruments and of this Regulation. It shall cover the period from 1 January 2014 to 30 June 2017 and shall focus on the achievement of the objectives of each Instrument by means of indicators measuring the results delivered and the efficiency of the Instruments.
With a view to achieving the objectives of each Instrument, that report shall in addition address, the added value of each Instrument, the scope for simplification, internal and external coherence, including complementarity and synergies between the Instruments, the continued relevance of all objectives, and the contribution of the measures to a consistent Union external action and, where relevant, to the Union priorities for smart, sustainable and inclusive growth. It shall take into account any findings and conclusions concerning the long-term impact of the Instruments. It shall also contain information about the leverage effect achieved by the funds of each financial instrument.
The report shall be undertaken for the specific purpose of improving the implementation of the Union's assistance. It shall inform decisions on the renewal, modification or suspension of the types of actions implemented under the Instruments.
The report shall also contain consolidated information from relevant annual reports on all funding governed by this Regulation, including external assigned revenues and contributions to trust funds offering a breakdown of spending by beneficiary country, use of financial instruments, commitments and payments.
A final evaluation report on the period from 2014 to2020 shall be established by the Commission within the interim review of the next financial period.
2.   The mid-term review report referred to in the first subparagraph of paragraph 1 shall be submitted to the European Parliament and to the Council, and shall be accompanied, if appropriate, by legislative proposals introducing the necessary modifications to the Instruments and to this Regulation.
3.   The values of the indicators on 1 January 2014 shall be used as a basis for assessing the extent to which the objectives have been achieved.
4.   Partner countries shall be required by the Commission to provide all the data and information necessary, in line with the international commitments on aid effectiveness, to permit the monitoring and evaluation of the measures concerned.
5.   The longer-term outcomes and impacts and the sustainability of effects of the Instruments shall be evaluated in accordance with the monitoring, evaluation and reporting rules and procedures applicable at that time.
