Article 1
Subject matter and principles
1.   This Regulation lays down the rules and conditions for the provision by the Union of financial assistance to actions, including action programmes and other measures, under the following instruments for financing external action for the period from 2014 to 2020: the Development Cooperation Instrument (DCI), the European Instrument for Democracy and Human Rights (EIDHR), the European Neighbourhood Instrument (ENI), the Instrument contributing to Stability and Peace, the Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance (IPA II) and the Partnership Instrument for cooperation with third countries (hereinafter referred to jointly as ‘the Instruments’ and individually as ‘the Instrument’).
For the purposes of this Regulation, the term ‘countries’ includes territories and regions, as appropriate.
2.   This Regulation does not apply to the implementation of actions financing the Erasmus+ programme under Regulation (EU) No 233/2014, Regulation (EU) No 232/2014, Regulation (EU) No 231/2014 and Regulation (EU) No 234/2014. Those actions shall be implemented in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 1288/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council (14), on the basis of the indicative programming documents referred to in the applicable Instrument, while ensuring conformity with those Regulations.
3.   The Commission shall ensure that actions are implemented in accordance with the objectives of the applicable Instrument, and in conformity with an effective protection of the financial interests of the Union. The Union's financial assistance provided on the basis of the Instruments shall be consistent with the rules and procedures laid down in Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012, which provides the basic financial and legal framework for their implementation.
4.   In applying this Regulation, the Commission shall use the most effective and efficient implementation methods. Where possible and appropriate in light of the nature of the action, the Commission shall also favour the use of the most simple procedures.
5.   Taking into account paragraph 4, in applying this Regulation, the Commission shall favour the use of partner countries' systems when possible and appropriate in light of the nature of the action.
6.   The Union shall seek to promote, develop and consolidate the principles of democracy, the rule of law and respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms on which it is founded, on the basis of, where appropriate, dialogue and cooperation with partner countries and regions. The Union shall integrate those principles in the implementation of the Instruments.
