Article 2
Adoption of action programmes, individual measures and special measures
1.   The Commission shall adopt annual action programmes, based on the indicative programming documents referred to in the relevant Instrument, where applicable. The Commission may also adopt multi-annual action programmes in accordance with Article 6(3).
Action programmes shall specify for each action the objectives pursued, the expected results and main activities, the methods of implementation, the budget and an indicative timetable, any associated support measures and performance monitoring arrangements.
When necessary, an action may be adopted as an individual measure before or after the adoption of annual or multi-annual action programmes.
In the event of unforeseen and duly justified needs or circumstances, and when funding is not possible from more appropriate sources, the Commission may adopt special measures not provided for in the indicative programming documents, including measures to ease the transition from emergency aid to long-term development operations or measures to better prepare people to deal with recurring crises.
2.   Action programmes, individual measures and special measures provided for in paragraph 1 of this Article shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 16(3).
3.   The procedure referred to in paragraph 2 shall not be required for:
(a)
individual measures for which the Union's financial assistance does not exceed EUR 5 million;
(b)
special measures for which the Union's financial assistance does not exceed EUR 10 million;
(c)
technical amendments to action programmes, individual measures and special measures. Technical amendments are adjustments, such as:
(i)
extensions of the implementation period;
(ii)
reassignments of funds between actions contained in an annual or multi-annual action programme; or
(iii)
increases or reductions of the budget of the annual or multi-annual action programmes, or of individual or special measures, by not more than 20 % of the initial budget and not exceeding EUR 10 million,
provided such amendments do not substantially affect the objectives of the measure concerned.
Measures adopted under this paragraph shall be communicated to the European Parliament and to the Member States through the relevant committee referred to in Article 16 within one month of their adoption.
4.   Paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 relating to action programmes and individual measures shall not apply to ENI cross-border cooperation.
5.   On duly justified imperative grounds of urgency, such as crises or immediate threats to democracy, the rule of law, human rights or fundamental freedoms, the Commission may adopt individual or special measures or amendments to existing action programmes and measures, in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 16(4).
6.   Appropriate environmental screening, including for climate change and biodiversity impacts, shall be undertaken at project level, in accordance with the applicable legislative acts of the Union, including Directive 2011/92/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council (15) and Council Directive 85/337/EEC (16), comprising, where applicable, an environmental impact assessment (EIA) for environmentally sensitive projects, in particular for major new infrastructure. Where relevant, strategic environmental assessments shall be used in the implementation of sectoral programmes. The involvement of interested stakeholders in environmental assessments and public access to the results of such assessments shall be ensured.
7.   In the design and implementation of programmes and projects, criteria regarding accessibility for persons with disabilities shall be duly taken into account.
