Article 5
1.   In the case of projects which, pursuant to Article 4, are to be made subject to an environmental impact assessment in accordance with this Article and Articles 6 to 10, Member States shall adopt the necessary measures to ensure that the developer supplies in an appropriate form the information specified in Annex IV inasmuch as:
(a)
the Member States consider that the information is relevant to a given stage of the consent procedure and to the specific characteristics of a particular project or type of project and of the environmental features likely to be affected;
(b)
the Member States consider that a developer may reasonably be required to compile this information having regard, inter alia, to current knowledge and methods of assessment.
2.   Member States shall take the necessary measures to ensure that, if the developer so requests before submitting an application for development consent, the competent authority shall give an opinion on the information to be supplied by the developer in accordance with paragraph 1. The competent authority shall consult the developer and authorities referred to in Article 6(1) before it gives its opinion. The fact that the authority has given an opinion under this paragraph shall not preclude it from subsequently requiring the developer to submit further information.
Member States may require the competent authorities to give such an opinion, irrespective of whether the developer so requests.
3.   The information to be provided by the developer in accordance with paragraph 1 shall include at least:
(a)
a description of the project comprising information on the site, design and size of the project;
(b)
a description of the measures envisaged in order to avoid, reduce and, if possible, remedy significant adverse effects;
(c)
the data required to identify and assess the main effects which the project is likely to have on the environment;
(d)
an outline of the main alternatives studied by the developer and an indication of the main reasons for his choice, taking into account the environmental effects;
(e)
a non-technical summary of the information referred to in points (a) to (d).
4.   Member States shall, if necessary, ensure that any authorities holding relevant information, with particular reference to Article 3, make this information available to the developer.
