Whereas:
(1)
Member States have been affected by the crisis resulting from the economic, social and health consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic in an unprecedented manner. The crisis hampers growth in Member States, which in turn aggravates the serious liquidity shortages which are due to the sudden and significant increase in public investments needed in Member States’ health systems and other sectors of their economies. The crisis has also exacerbated the situation of people at risk of poverty, thus reducing the social cohesion in Member States. In addition, the closure of internal borders has had a severe impact on economic cooperation, in particular in border areas, affecting the commuting of workers and the viability of micro, small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs). This has created an exceptional situation which needs to be addressed with specific, immediate and extraordinary measures that reach the real economy quickly.
(2)
In order to respond to the impact of the crisis, Regulations (EU) No 1301/2013 (4) and (EU) No 1303/2013 (5) of the European Parliament and the Council were amended by Regulation (EU) 2020/460 of the European Parliament and of the Council (6) in order to allow for more flexibility in the implementation of operational programmes supported by the European Regional Development Fund (the ‘ERDF’), the European Social Fund (the ‘ESF’) and the Cohesion Fund (collectively ‘the Funds’) and by the European Maritime and Fisheries Fund (the ‘EMFF’). However, as the serious negative effects on Union economies and societies worsened, both Regulations were amended again by Regulation (EU) 2020/558 of the European Parliament and of the Council (7). Those amendments have provided exceptional additional flexibility to enable the Member States to concentrate on the necessary response to the unprecedented crisis by enhancing the possibility to mobilise non-utilised support from the Funds and by simplifying procedural requirements linked to programme implementation and audits.
(3)
On 23 April 2020, the European Council endorsed the ‘Roadmap for recovery’ in order to redress huge shocks to the economy and to mitigate, on the one hand, the social and economic consequences for the Union stemming from the exceptional restrictions put in place by Member States to contain the spread of COVID-19 and, on the other, the risk of an asymmetric recovery, stemming from the different national means available in different Member States, which has, in turn, had a serious impact on the functioning of the internal market. The Roadmap for recovery has a strong investment component and calls for the establishment of the European Recovery Fund. In addition, and as restated in the conclusions of the European Council of 21 July 2020, it mandates the Commission to analyse the needs so that the resources would be targeted towards those sectors and geographical parts of the Union that are most affected, while also clarifying the link with the Multiannual Financial Framework for 2021-2027.
(4)
In accordance with Council Regulation (EU) 2020/2094 (8) and within the limits of the resources allocated therein, recovery and resilience measures under the European Structural and Investment Funds should be carried out to address the unprecedented impact of the COVID-19 crisis. Such additional resources should be used to ensure compliance with the time limits provided for in Regulation (EU) 2020/2094.
(5)
This Regulation lays down rules and implementing arrangements regarding the additional resources provided as Recovery Assistance for Cohesion and the Territories of Europe (‘REACT-EU’) to provide assistance for fostering crisis repair in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic and its social consequences and for preparing a green, digital and resilient recovery of the economy. Under REACT-EU, an additional exceptional amount of up to EUR 47 500 000 000 in 2018 prices for budgetary commitment from the Structural Funds for the years 2021 and 2022 should be made available to support those Member States and regions that are most affected by crisis repair in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic and its social consequences and that are preparing a green, digital and resilient recovery of the economy (‘REACT-EU resources’), with a view to deploying resources quickly to the real economy through the existing operational programmes. The REACT-EU resources stem from the European Union Recovery Instrument. Part of the REACT-EU resources should be allocated to technical assistance at the initiative of the Commission. The Commission should set out the breakdown of the REACT-EU resources for each Member State on the basis of an allocation method based on the latest available objective statistical data concerning Member States’ relative prosperity and the extent of the effect of the COVID-19 crisis on their economies and societies. Before the application of the allocation method concerning the REACT-EU resources for the year 2021 and to provide support for the most important sectors following the COVID-19 crisis in certain Member States, an amount of EUR 100 000 000 and EUR 50 000 000 should be allocated to Luxembourg and Malta, respectively. The allocation method should include a dedicated additional amount for the outermost regions, given the specific vulnerability of their economies and societies. In order to reflect the evolving nature of the effects of the COVID-19 crisis, the breakdown should be revised in 2021 on the basis of the same allocation method and using the latest statistical data available by 19 October 2021 to distribute the 2022 tranche of the REACT-EU resources.
(6)
In view of the importance of tackling climate change in line with the Union’s commitments to implement the Paris Agreement and the UN Sustainable Development Goals, the Funds will contribute to mainstream climate actions and to the achievement of an overall target of 30 % of the Union budget expenditure supporting climate objectives. REACT-EU is expected to contribute 25 % of the overall financial envelope to climate objectives. In line with the nature of REACT-EU as a crisis-repair instrument and the flexibility provided by this Regulation, including the lack of thematic concentration requirements and the possibility for Member States to direct the REACT-EU resources to support ERDF or ESF operations according to their needs, the level of Member States’ contributions towards that ambition may differ depending on national priorities.
(7)
