Article 21
Information system and exchanges
1.   Member States and the Commission shall exchange information on the experience acquired with regard to the prevention of major accidents and the limitation of their consequences. This information shall concern, in particular, the functioning of the measures provided for in this Directive.
2.   By 30 September 2019, and every four years thereafter, Member States shall provide the Commission with a report on the implementation of this Directive.
3.   For establishments covered by this Directive, Member States shall supply the Commission with at least the following information:
(a)
the name or trade name of the operator and the full address of the establishment concerned;
(b)
the activity or activities of the establishment.
The Commission shall set up and keep up to date a database containing the information supplied by the Member States. Access to the database shall be restricted to persons authorised by the Commission or the competent authorities of the Member States.
4.   The Commission shall set up and keep at the disposal of Member States a database containing, in particular, details of the major accidents which have occurred within the territory of Member States, for the purpose of:
(a)
the rapid dissemination of the information supplied by Member States pursuant to Article 18(1) and (2) among all competent authorities;
(b)
distribution to competent authorities of an analysis of the causes of major accidents and the lessons learned from them;
(c)
supply of information to competent authorities on preventive measures;
(d)
provision of information on organisations able to provide advice or relevant information on the occurrence, prevention and mitigation of major accidents.
5.   The Commission shall, by 1 January 2015, adopt implementing acts to establish the formats for communicating the information referred to in paragraphs 2 and 3 of this Article from Member States and the relevant databases referred to in paragraphs 3 and 4. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 27(2).
6.   The databases referred to in paragraph 4 shall contain, at least:
(a)
the information supplied by Member States in accordance with Article 18(1) and (2);
(b)
an analysis of the causes of the accidents;
(c)
the lessons learned from the accidents;
(d)
the preventive measures necessary to prevent a recurrence.
7.   The Commission shall make publicly available the non-confidential part of the data.
