Article 14
Information to the public
1.   Member States shall ensure that the information referred to in Annex V is permanently available to the public, including electronically. The information shall be kept updated, where necessary, including in the event of modifications covered by Article 11.
2.   For upper-tier establishments, Member States shall also ensure that:
(a)
all persons likely to be affected by a major accident receive regularly and in the most appropriate form, without having to request it, clear and intelligible information on safety measures and requisite behaviour in the event of a major accident;
(b)
the safety report is made available to the public upon request subject to Article 22(3); where Article 22(3) applies, an amended report, for instance in the form of a non-technical summary, which shall include at least general information on major-accident hazards and on potential effects on human health and the environment in the event of a major accident, shall be made available;
(c)
the inventory of dangerous substances is made available to the public upon request subject to Article 22(3).
The information to be supplied under point (a) of the first subparagraph of this paragraph shall include at least the information referred to in Annex V. That information shall likewise be supplied to all buildings and areas of public use, including schools and hospitals, and to all neighbouring establishments in the case of establishments covered by Article 9. Member States shall ensure that the information is supplied at least every five years and periodically reviewed and where necessary, updated, including in the event of modifications covered by Article 11.
3.   Member States shall, with respect to the possibility of a major accident with transboundary effects originating in an upper-tier establishment, provide sufficient information to the potentially affected Member States so that all relevant provisions contained in Articles 12 and 13 and in this Article can be applied, where applicable, by the potentially affected Member States.
4.   Where the Member State concerned has decided that an establishment close to the territory of another Member State is incapable of creating a major-accident hazard beyond its boundary for the purposes of Article 12(8) and is not therefore required to produce an external emergency plan under Article 12(1), it shall inform the other Member State of its reasoned decision.
