Article 18
Information to be supplied by the Member States following a major accident
1.   For the purpose of prevention and mitigation of major accidents, Member States shall inform the Commission of major accidents meeting the criteria of Annex VI which have occurred within their territory. They shall provide it with the following details:
(a)
the Member State, the name and address of the authority responsible for the report;
(b)
the date, time and place of the accident, including the full name of the operator and the address of the establishment involved;
(c)
a brief description of the circumstances of the accident, including the dangerous substances involved, and the immediate effects on human health and the environment;
(d)
a brief description of the emergency measures taken and of the immediate precautions necessary to prevent recurrence;
(e)
the results of their analysis and recommendations.
2.   The information referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article shall be provided as soon as practicable and at the latest within one year of the date of the accident, using the database referred to in Article 21(4). Where only preliminary information under point (e) of paragraph 1 can be provided within this time-limit for inclusion in the database, the information shall be updated once the results of further analysis and recommendations are available.
Reporting of the information referred to in point (e) of paragraph 1 by Member States may be delayed to allow for the completion of judicial proceedings where such reporting may affect those proceedings.
3.   For the purposes of providing the information referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article by Member States, a report form shall be established in the form of implementing acts. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 27(2).
4.   Member States shall inform the Commission of the name and address of any body which might have relevant information on major accidents and which is able to advise the competent authorities of other Member States which have to intervene in the event of such an accident.
