Article 8
Major-accident prevention policy
1.   Member States shall require the operator to draw up a document in writing setting out the major-accident prevention policy (MAPP) and to ensure that it is properly implemented. The MAPP shall be designed to ensure a high level of protection of human health and the environment. It shall be proportionate to the major-accident hazards. It shall include the operator’s overall aims and principles of action, the role and responsibility of management, as well as the commitment towards continuously improving the control of major-accident hazards, and ensuring a high level of protection.
2.   The MAPP shall be drawn up and, where required by national law, sent to the competent authority within the following time-limits:
(a)
for new establishments, a reasonable period of time prior to the start of construction or operation, or prior to the modifications leading to a change in the inventory of dangerous substances;
(b)
for all other cases, one year from the date from which this Directive applies to the establishment concerned.
3.   Paragraphs 1 and 2 shall not apply if the operator has already established the MAPP and, where required by national law, sent it to the competent authority before 1 June 2015, and the information contained therein complies with paragraph 1 and has remained unchanged.
4.   Without prejudice to Article 11, the operator shall periodically review and where necessary update the MAPP, at least every five years. Where required by national law the updated MAPP shall be sent to the competent authority without delay.
5.   The MAPP shall be implemented by appropriate means, structures and by a safety management system, in accordance with Annex III, proportionate to the major-accident hazards, and the complexity of the organisation or the activities of the establishment. For lower-tier establishments, the obligation to implement the MAPP may be fulfilled by other appropriate means, structures and management systems, proportionate to major-accident hazards, taking into account the principles set out in Annex III.
