Article 14
The EFSD Guarantee Fund
1.   The EFSD Guarantee Fund shall constitute a liquidity cushion from which the eligible counterparts shall be paid in the event of a call on the EFSD Guarantee pursuant to the relevant EFSD guarantee agreement.
2.   The EFSD Guarantee Fund shall be endowed by:
(a)
contributions from the general budget of the Union and other sources;
(b)
voluntary contributions from Member States and other contributors;
(c)
returns on invested resources of EFSD Guarantee Fund;
(d)
amounts recovered from defaulting debtors in accordance with the recovery provisions laid down in EFSD guarantee agreements;
(e)
revenues and any other payments received by the Union in accordance with EFSD guarantee agreements.
3.   Revenues of the EFSD Guarantee Fund as provided for in points (c) and (e) of paragraph 2 of this Article shall constitute internal assigned revenue in accordance with Article 21(4) of Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012.
4.   The resources of the EFSD Guarantee Fund referred to in paragraph 2 shall be directly managed by the Commission and invested in accordance with the principle of sound financial management following appropriate prudential rules. By 30 June 2019, the Commission shall submit to the European Parliament and to the Council an independent external evaluation of the advantages and disadvantages of entrusting the financial management of the assets of the Guarantee Fund for external actions, as established by the Council Regulation (EC, Euratom) No 480/2009 (12), and of the EFSD to the Commission, to the EIB, or to a combination of the two, taking into account the relevant technical and institutional criteria used in comparing asset management services, including the technical infrastructure, comparison of costs for the services given, institutional set-up, reporting, performance, accountability and expertise of each institution and the other asset management mandates for the general budget of the Union. The evaluation shall be accompanied, where appropriate, by a legislative proposal.
5.   Endowments to the EFSD Guarantee Fund shall be used to reach an appropriate level of provisioning to cover the total EFSD Guarantee obligations. The provisioning rate shall be at 50 % of the total EFSD Guarantee obligations covered by the general budget of the Union.
6.   Following an assessment of the adequacy of the level of the EFSD Guarantee Fund in accordance with the report provided for under Article 16(3), the following payments shall be made:
(a)
without prejudice to paragraph 8 of this Article, any surplus shall be paid to the general budget of the Union;
(b)
any replenishment of the EFSD Guarantee Fund shall be paid in annual tranches over a maximum period of three years starting from year n+1.
7.   From 1 January 2021, if, as a result of calls on the EFSD Guarantee, the level of resources in the Guarantee Fund falls below 50 % of the provisioning rate referred to in paragraph 5, the Commission shall submit a report on:
(a)
the cause of the shortfall, with detailed explanations; and
(b)
where deemed necessary, any exceptional measures that may be required to replenish the EFSD Guarantee Fund.
8.   After a call on the EFSD Guarantee, endowments to the EFSD Guarantee Fund provided for in points (c), (d) and (e) of paragraph 2 of this Article exceeding the resources necessary to reach the provisioning rate at the level referred to in paragraph 5 of this Article or any surplus provided for in point (a) of paragraph 6 of this Article shall first be used within the limits of the maximum period provided for in Article 8(3) to restore the EFSD Guarantee up to its initial amount.
