Article 11
Eligibility and selection of counterparts
1.   The eligible counterparts for the purposes of the EFSD Guarantee shall be:
(a)
the EIB and the European Investment Fund;
(b)
public law bodies;
(c)
international organisations and their agencies;
(d)
bodies governed by private law with a public service mission to the extent that they provide adequate financial guarantees;
(e)
bodies governed by the private law of a Member State that provide adequate financial guarantees, by way of derogation from point (vii) of point (c) of Article 58(1) of Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012;
(f)
bodies governed by the private law of a partner country that provide adequate financial guarantees, by way of derogation from point (vii) of point (c) of Article 58(1) of Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012.
2.   Eligible counterparts shall comply with the rules and conditions provided for in Article 60 of Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012. In the case of bodies governed by the private law of a Member State or a partner country, preference shall be given to those bodies that disclose information related to environment, social and corporate governance criteria.
The EFSD Guarantee shall be implemented whenever possible under the lead of a European eligible counterpart in line with the criteria set out in this Regulation. The Commission shall ensure an effective, efficient and fair use of available resources among eligible counterparts, while promoting cooperation between them.
The Commission shall ensure fair treatment for all eligible counterparts and shall ensure that conflicts of interest are avoided throughout the implementation period of the EFSD. In order to ensure complementarity, the Commission may request any relevant information from eligible counterparts about their non-EFSD operations.
3.   The Commission shall select the eligible counterparts pursuant to Article 61 of Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012.
4.   The European Parliament or the Council may invite eligible counterparts to an exchange of views concerning financing and investment operations covered by this Regulation.
