Article 5
Strategic board of the EFSD
1.   In the management of the EFSD the Commission shall be advised by a strategic board.
2.   The strategic board shall advise the Commission on the strategic orientation and priorities of EFSD Guarantee investments and contribute to their alignment with the guiding principles and objectives of the Union’s external action, development policy and European Neighbourhood Policy, as well as with the purpose of the EFSD as set out in Article 3. It shall also support the Commission in setting overall investment goals as regards the use of the EFSD Guarantee and monitor an appropriate and diversified geographical and thematic coverage for investment windows, while giving special attention to countries identified as experiencing fragility or conflict, LDCs and heavily indebted poor countries.
3.   The strategic board shall also support overall coordination, complementarity and coherence between the regional investment platforms, between the three pillars of the EIP, between the EIP and the Union’s other efforts on migration and on the implementation of the 2030 Agenda, as well as with the relevant Union external financing instruments and trust funds, and with the external lending mandate operations managed by the EIB, including the EIB’s Economic Resilience Initiative, and the ACP Investment Facility, without prejudice to the EIB’s internal governance rules.
4.   The strategic board shall be composed of representatives of the Commission and of the High Representative, of all Member States and of the EIB. The European Parliament shall have observer status. Contributors, eligible counterparts, partner countries, relevant regional organisations and other stakeholders may be given observer status, where appropriate. The strategic board shall be consulted prior to the inclusion of any new observer. The strategic board shall be co-chaired by the Commission and the High Representative.
5.   The strategic board shall meet at least twice a year and, when possible, adopt opinions by consensus. Additional meetings may be organised at any time by the chair or at the request of one third of its members. Where consensus cannot be reached, the voting rights as agreed during the first meeting of the strategic board and laid down in its rules of procedure shall apply. Those voting rights shall take due account of the source of financing. The rules of procedure shall set out the framework regarding the role of observers. The minutes and agendas of the meetings of the strategic board shall, following their adoption, be made public.
6.   The Commission shall report annually to the strategic board about the progress made in respect of the implementation of the EFSD. The strategic board shall regularly organise a consultation of relevant stakeholders on the strategic orientation and implementation of the EFSD.
7.   During the implementation period of the EFSD, the strategic board shall, as soon as possible, adopt and publish guidelines setting out how conformity of EFSD operations with the objectives and eligibility criteria set out in Article 9 is to be ensured.
8.   In its strategic guidance, the strategic board shall take due account of relevant European Parliament resolutions and Council decisions and conclusions.
