Article 12
Coverage and terms of the EFSD Guarantee
1.   Without prejudice to paragraph 2, the EFSD Guarantee shall not, at any time, exceed EUR 1 500 000 000.
2.   Member States and EFTA countries may contribute to the EFSD Guarantee Fund in the form of guarantees or cash. Subject to the opinion of the strategic board and approval by the Commission, other contributors may contribute in the form of cash.
The Commission shall inform the European Parliament and the Council without delay of the contributions confirmed.
The amount of the EFSD Guarantee exceeding the amount indicated in paragraph 1 shall be granted on behalf of the Union.
Aggregate net payments from the general budget of the Union under the EFSD Guarantee shall not exceed EUR 1 500 000 000. Without prejudice to paragraph 4, payments for guarantee calls shall be made, where necessary, by the contributing Member States or other contributors on pari passu basis with the Union.
A contribution agreement shall be concluded between the Commission, on behalf of the Union, and the contributor, and shall contain, in particular, provisions concerning the payment conditions.
3.   The EFSD Guarantee shall only become available when a contribution in cash of EUR 400 000 000 from the 11th EDF to the general budget of the Union has been confirmed.
4.   The contributions made by the Member States in the form of a guarantee may only be called for payments of guarantee calls after the funding from the general budget of the Union increased by any other cash contributions has been used on payments of guarantee calls.
At the request of the Member States in the strategic board, their contributions may be earmarked for the initiation of projects in specific regions, countries, sectors or existing investment windows.
Any contribution may be used to cover guarantee calls regardless of earmarking.
5.   At least EUR 400 000 000 of EFSD Guarantee coverage shall be allocated for investments in the partner countries eligible under the 11th EDF throughout the implementation period of the EFSD Guarantee, in line with the objectives of the ACP-EU Partnership Agreement.
6.   At least EUR 100 000 000 of EFSD Guarantee coverage shall be allocated for investments in the partner countries in the eastern and southern neighbourhoods, in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 232/2014.
