Article 59
Derogations
1.   Until 15 March 2013, Ireland, as a Member State located on an island, with a rail link to only one other Member State, and the United Kingdom, in respect of Northern Ireland, on the same basis:
(a)
do not need to entrust to an independent body the functions determining equitable and non-discriminatory access to infrastructure, as provided for in the first subparagraph of Article 7(1) in so far as that Article obliges Member States to establish independent bodies performing the tasks referred to in Article 7(2);
(b)
do not need to apply the requirements set out in Article 27, Article 29(2), Articles 38, 39 and 42, Article 46(4) and (6), Article 47, Article 49(3), and Articles 50 to 53, 55 and 56 on condition that decisions on the allocation of infrastructure capacity or the charging of fees are open to appeal, if so requested in writing by a railway undertaking, before an independent body which shall take its decision within two months of the submission of all relevant information and whose decision shall be subject to judicial review.
2.   Where more than one railway undertaking licensed in accordance with Article 17, or, in the case of Ireland and Northern Ireland, a railway company so licensed elsewhere, submits an official application to operate competing railway services in, to or from Ireland or Northern Ireland, the continued applicability of this derogation shall be decided upon in accordance with the advisory procedure referred to in Article 62(2).
The derogations referred to in paragraph 1 shall not apply where a railway undertaking operating railway services in Ireland or Northern Ireland submits an official application to operate railway services on, to or from the territory of another Member State, with the exceptions of Ireland for railway undertakings operating in Northern Ireland and the United Kingdom for railway undertakings operating in Ireland.
Within one year from the receipt of either the decision referred to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph or notification of the official application referred to in the second subparagraph of this paragraph, the Member State or States concerned (Ireland or the United Kingdom with respect to Northern Ireland) shall put in place legislation to implement the Articles referred to in paragraph 1.
3.   A derogation referred to in paragraph 1 may be renewed for periods not longer than five years. Not later than 12 months before the expiry date of the derogation a Member State availing itself of that derogation may address a request to the Commission for a renewed derogation. Any such request shall be justified. The Commission shall examine such a request and adopt a decision in accordance with the advisory procedure referred to in Article 62(2). That procedure shall apply to any decision related to the request.
When adopting its decision, the Commission shall take into account any development in the geopolitical situation and the development of the rail market in, from and to the Member State that requested the renewed derogation.
