Article 11
Eligible actions
1.   Only actions implementing the objectives set out in Article 3 shall be eligible for funding.
2.   Grants may finance the following types of action:
(a)
strategic nature projects under the subprogramme referred to in point (1)(a) of Article 4;
(b)
strategic integrated projects under the subprogrammes referred to in points (1)(b), (2)(a) and 2(b) of Article 4;
(c)
technical assistance projects;
(d)
standard action projects;
(e)
other actions needed for the purpose of achieving the general objective set out in Article 3(1), including coordination and support actions aimed at capacity building, at dissemination of information and of knowledge, and at awareness-raising to support the transition to renewable energy and increased energy efficiency.
3.   Projects under the subprogramme 'Nature and Biodiversity' that concern the management, restoration and monitoring of Natura 2000 sites in accordance with Directives 92/43/EEC and 2009/147/EC shall take account of priorities set out in national and regional plans, strategies and policies on nature and biodiversity conservation, including in prioritised action frameworks adopted pursuant to Directive 92/43/EEC.
4.   Technical assistance projects for capacity building related to the activities of Member States' authorities to improve the effective participation in the LIFE programme shall support activities of those Member States with low effective participation, with a view to improving the National Contact Points' services across the Union and to increasing the overall quality of submitted proposals.
5.   Grants may finance activities outside a Member State or an overseas country or territory linked to it, provided that the project pursues Union environmental and climate objectives and those activities are necessary to ensure the effectiveness of interventions carried out in a Member State or in an overseas country or territory linked to it, or to support international agreements to which the Union is party by providing a contribution to the organisation of multilateral conferences. The maximum contribution provided to international agreements for the organisation of multilateral conferences shall be EUR 3,5 million for the duration of the LIFE programme indicated in Article 1, and such grants shall not count towards meeting the threshold referred to in the first subparagraph of Article 9(3).
6.   Operating grants shall support the functioning of non-profit making entities which are involved in the development, implementation and enforcement of Union legislation and policy, and which are primarily active in the area of the environment or climate action, including energy transition, in line with the objectives of the LIFE Programme set out in Article 3.
