Article 19
Monitoring and reporting
1.   The Commission shall report on progress of the LIFE Programme towards the achievement of the objectives set out in Article 3, based on the indicators set out in Annex II.
2.   To ensure the effective assessment of the LIFE Programme's progress towards the achievement of its objectives, the Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts, in accordance with Article 23, to amend Annex II to review or complement the indicators where considered necessary, including with a view to their alignment with indicators set out for other Union programmes, and to supplement this Regulation with provisions on the establishment of a monitoring and evaluation framework.
3.   The Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 23 to supplement this Regulation by defining, on the basis of Annex II, specific indicators for each subprogramme and type of project.
4.   The Commission shall ensure that data for monitoring programme implementation and results are collected efficiently, effectively, and in a timely manner. To that end, and in accordance with relevant methodologies, proportionate reporting requirements shall be imposed on recipients of Union funds to enable the collection of aggregable project-level output and impact indicators for all relevant specific environment and climate policy objectives, including in relation to Natura 2000 and the emissions of certain atmospheric air pollutants, including CO2.
5.   The Commission shall regularly monitor and report on mainstreaming of climate and biodiversity objectives, including the amount of expenditure. While taking into account the demand-driven nature of the LIFE programme, 61 % of the overall amount of the LIFE Programme as defined in Article 5 is expected to contribute to the budget-wide target of at least 30 % of expenditure contributing to climate objectives. This contribution shall be tracked through the Union climate marker system. This Regulation shall contribute to mainstreaming biodiversity action in the Union's policies and to the achievement of the overall ambition of providing 7,5 % of annual spending under the multiannual financial framework to biodiversity objectives in 2024 and 10 % of annual spending under the multiannual financial framework to biodiversity objectives in 2026 and in 2027, while considering the existing overlaps between climate and biodiversity goals.
Biodiversity-related spending shall be tracked using an effective, transparent and comprehensive methodology to be set out by the Commission, in cooperation with the European Parliament and with the Council, as referred to in the Interinstitutional Agreement of 16 December 2020 between the European Parliament, the Council of the European Union and the European Commission on budgetary discipline, on cooperation in budgetary matters and on sound financial management, as well as on new own resources, including a roadmap towards the introduction of new own resources. Those tracking methods shall be used to quantify the commitment appropriations expected to contribute respectively to climate and to biodiversity objectives over the multiannual financial framework for 2021-2027 at the appropriate level of disaggregation. The spending shall be presented annually in the Programme Statement. The contribution of the LIFE Programme to Union climate and biodiversity objectives shall be reported regularly in the context of evaluations and the annual report.
6.   The Commission shall assess synergies between the LIFE Programme and other complementary Union programmes and those between its subprogrammes.
