Article 18
Multiannual work programme
1.   The Commission shall, by means of implementing acts, adopt multiannual work programmes for the LIFE Programme. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 22(2).
2.   Each multiannual work programme shall specify, in line with the objectives set out in Article 3, the following:
(a)
the amounts to be allocated between needs under each subprogramme and between different types of funding, as well as the maximum total amount to be allocated to grants as referred to in points (a) and (b) of Article 11(2);
(b)
the maximum total amount for financing in the form of financial instruments within blending operations under the LIFE Programme, where applicable;
(c)
the maximum total amount for grants to be awarded to the bodies listed in Annex I in accordance with Article 13;
(d)
the project topics or specific needs for which there is pre-allocation of funding for the projects referred to in points (c) and (d) of Article 11(2);
(e)
the strategies and plans targeted by strategic integrated projects for which funding may be requested for projects as referred to in point (b) of Article 11(2);
(f)
the maximum eligibility period for the implementation of the projects;
(g)
indicative timetables for the calls for proposals for the period covered by the multiannual work programme;
(h)
the technical methodology for the project submission and selection procedure, and the award criteria in accordance with the elements referred to in Article 14;
(i)
the co-financing rates referred to in Article 9(4);
(j)
the maximum co-financing rates for the eligible actions referred to in point (e) of Article 11(2);
(k)
where relevant, detailed rules concerning the application of cumulative and alternative financing;
(l)
low effective participation and eligible activities and award criteria for technical assistance projects for the capacity building related to the activities of Member States' authorities for effective participation in the LIFE programme.
3.   The duration of the first multiannual work programme shall be four years and the duration of the second multiannual work programme shall be three years.
4.   In the framework of the multiannual work programmes, the Commission shall publish calls for proposals for the period covered. The Commission shall ensure that unused funds in a given call for proposals are reallocated between the different types of actions referred to in Article 11(2) within the same field.
5.   The Commission shall ensure that stakeholders are consulted in the development of the multiannual work programmes.
