Article 20
Evaluation
1.   The Commission shall carry out evaluations provided for under this Regulation in a timely manner to feed into the decision-making process with due regard for coherence, synergies, Union added value and long-term sustainability, taking account of the Union's climate and environment priorities.
2.   The Commission shall perform the mid-term evaluation of the LIFE Programme once there is sufficient information available about its implementation, but no later than 42 months after the start of the implementation of the LIFE Programme, making use of the indicators as set out in accordance with Annex II.
The evaluation shall cover at least the following:
(a)
qualitative and quantitative aspects of the implementation of the LIFE Programme;
(b)
efficiency of the use of resources;
(c)
the degree to which the objectives of all the measures have been achieved, specifying where possible, results and impacts;
(d)
the actual or expected success of projects in leveraging other Union funds, taking into account, in particular, the benefits of increased coherence with other Union financial instruments;
(e)
the extent to which synergies between the objectives have been reached and the complementarity of the LIFE Programme with other relevant Union programmes;
(f)
the Union added value and long-term impact of the LIFE Programme, with a view to taking a decision on the renewal, modification or suspension of measures;
(g)
the extent to which stakeholders have been involved;
(h)
a quantitative and qualitative analysis of the contribution of the LIFE Programme to the conservation status of habitats and species listed in Directives 92/43/EEC and 2009/147/EC;
(i)
an analysis of the geographical coverage across the Union, as referred to in Article 9(5), and, if no such coverage is reached, an analysis of the underlying reasons for such lack of coverage.
3.   At the end of the implementation of the LIFE Programme, but no later than four years after the end of the period specified in the second paragraph of Article 1, the Commission shall carry out a final evaluation of the LIFE Programme.
4.   The Commission shall communicate the conclusions of the evaluations accompanied by its observations to the European Parliament, to the Council, to the European Economic and Social Committee and to the Committee of the Regions. The Commission shall make the results of the evaluations publicly available.
