Whereas:
(1)
Regulation (EC) No 663/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council (3) established the European Energy Programme for Recovery (EEPR) to aid economic recovery by granting a financial envelope of EUR 3,98 billion for 2009 and 2010.
(2)
This Regulation should be without prejudice to the aim of granting as much of the financial envelope of EUR 3,98 billion as possible by the end of 2010 to the sub-programmes referred to in Chapter II of Regulation (EC) No 663/2009. However, it has been established that part of that amount will not be committed under those sub-programmes.
(3)
In the spirit of the Europe 2020 strategy for sustainable growth and jobs, and in line with the EU climate and energy package and the 2006 Action Plan for Energy Efficiency, the development of further renewable energy sources and the promotion of energy efficiency would contribute to green growth, building a competitive and sustainable economy, and tackling climate change. By supporting those policies, the Union will create new jobs and green market opportunities, thereby fostering the development of a competitive, secure and sustainable economy. Cooperation among the various tiers of government (multi-level governance) is essential in this context.
(4)
Providing increased financial incentive is a key element in lowering the barriers that high up-front costs represent and in stimulating sustainable energy improvements. A dedicated financial facility (the facility) should therefore be created to use the funding under Chapter II of Regulation (EC) No 663/2009 which cannot be committed by the end of 2010. The creation of the facility should be considered in the light of the Sustainable Energy Financing Initiative proposed by the Commission. The facility should support the development of energy efficiency and renewable energy projects and facilitate the financing of investment projects related to energy efficiency and renewable energy by local, regional and national public authorities, in particular in urban settings. In this process, attention should be paid to synergies with other financial resources available in the Member States, such as the Structural and Cohesion Funds, the European Local Energy Assistance (ELENA) Facility and the European Regional Development Fund under Regulation (EC) No 397/2009 (4), in order to avoid overlaps with other financial instruments.
(5)
Investment support in sustainable energy can be most effective and beneficial when targeted at local level. However, in duly justified cases it may be more effective to aim at the national level, e.g. for reasons related to the availability or functioning of relevant administrative structures.
(6)
To maximise the impact of the Union funding in the short term, the facility should be managed by one or more financial intermediaries such as international financial institutions. The selection of such financial intermediaries should take place on the basis of their demonstrated ability to use the funding in the most efficient and effective way, with the objective of maximising the participation, within the shortest possible time, of other public and private investors and of achieving the highest leverage between the Union funding and the total investment with a view to raising significant investments in the Union. However, in times of financial and economic crises which have a particularly adverse effect on the finances of local and regional authorities, it should be ensured that the difficult budgetary situation of those authorities does not hinder them from being able to access the funding.
(7)
In compliance with Regulation (EC) No 663/2009, investment projects should be financed under the facility only if they have a rapid, measurable and substantial impact on economic recovery within the Union, increased energy security and the reduction in greenhouse gas emissions. Such investment projects contribute to green growth, the development of a competitive, connected, sustainable and green economy, as well as to the protection of employment, job creation and tackling climate change, in accordance with the ‘Europe 2020’ objectives.
(8)
The criteria set out in Regulation (EC) No 663/2009 should apply to the selection and eligibility of the projects financed under the facility. The geographical balance of the projects should also be taken into account as an essential element, to ensure the impact of this Regulation on economic recovery throughout the Union, and in recognition of the fact that in some Member States, projects have not or have only partially been financed under Chapter II of Regulation (EC) No 663/2009.
(9)
In view of the required short-term economic impact of this Regulation, the period between receipt of an application for a project and the final decision thereon should not exceed 6 months.
(10)
Individual legal commitments implementing budgetary commitments under Chapter IIa should be made by 31 March 2011.
(11)
The facility should not constitute a precedent with regard to the use of the general budget of the Union and possible future funding measures, including in the energy sector, but should be considered rather as an exceptional measure adopted during a period of economic difficulty.
(12)
Due to the urgent need to address the economic crisis, expenditure incurred under Chapter II of Regulation (EC) No 663/2009 should be eligible as from 13 July 2009 as many applicants requested the eligibility of expenditure from the submission of the grant application in line with Article 112 of Council Regulation (EC, Euratom) No 1605/2002 of 25 June 2002 on the Financial Regulation applicable to the general budget of the European Communities (5) (the Financial Regulation). Expenditure incurred under Chapter IIa should be eligible as from 1 January 2011.
(13)
Due to the urgent need to address the economic crisis, this Regulation should enter into force immediately on publication,
HAVE ADOPTED THIS REGULATION:
