Article 22
Mitigation measures for the free movement of persons
1.   During the internal market emergency mode and for the purpose of facilitating the free movement of persons referred to in Article 21, points (f) to (i), the Commission may, by means of implementing acts, adopt administrative arrangements or provide Member States with digital tools to facilitate the identification of the categories of persons and verification of the facts referred to in those provisions by the Member States in cooperation with the other relevant Member States and the Commission.
2.   During the internal market emergency mode, where the Commission establishes that Member States have put in place templates for attesting that an individual or economic operator fulfils the general requirements set out in national emergency measures and it considers that the use of different templates by each Member State is an obstacle to the free movement of those individuals or economic operators and their equipment, the Commission may issue, by means of implementing acts, templates which may be used by the Member States on a voluntary basis.
3.   Without prejudice to relevant Union law and applicable national law and procedures, Member States shall prioritise declaration, registration or authorisation procedures with regard to providers of crisis-relevant services.
4.   The Commission shall identify the categories of persons involved in the production or supply of crisis-relevant goods and services for which it is necessary to facilitate free movement by establishing templates by means of implementing acts, after consulting the Board, which may be used by the Member States on a voluntary basis.
5.   The implementing acts referred to in paragraphs 1, 2 and 4 of this Article shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 45(2). On duly justified imperative grounds of urgency relating to the impact of the crisis on the internal market, the Commission shall adopt immediately applicable implementing acts in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 45(3).
6.   The Commission shall make information on the mitigation measures it has adopted pursuant to this Article publicly available on a dedicated website.

Section II



Transparency and administrative assistance


