Article 16
Monitoring
1.   When the internal market vigilance mode has been activated in accordance with Article 14, the competent authorities of the Member States shall monitor the supply chains of goods and services of critical importance and the free movement of persons, including workers, involved in the production and supply of those goods and services.
2.   The Commission shall provide for standardised and secure electronic means for the collection of the information obtained through the monitoring referred to in paragraph 1 and the processing of that information in an aggregated manner. Without prejudice to national law requiring, in compliance with Union law, that such information, including business secrets, be kept confidential, confidentiality shall be ensured with regard to commercially sensitive information and information relating to the security and public order of the Union or the Member States.
3.   Member States shall, where possible, set up, update and maintain an inventory of the relevant economic operators established in their respective national territory that operate along the supply chains of goods and services of critical importance. The contents of that inventory shall be confidential at all times.
4.   On the basis of the inventory set up pursuant to paragraph 3, competent authorities of the Member States shall, where it is not possible to obtain the information from other sources, address requests for the voluntary provision of information to the most relevant economic operators along the supply chains of goods and services of critical importance and operating in their respective national territory. Such requests shall in particular state which information about factors impacting the availability of the identified goods and services of critical importance is requested. The economic operator addressed shall provide the information requested on a voluntary basis, in accordance with Union competition rules governing the exchange of information. The competent authorities of the Member States shall transmit the relevant findings to the Commission and the Board without delay via their respective central liaison office.
5.   Competent authorities of the Member States shall have due regard to the administrative burden on economic operators, and in particular on SMEs, which may be generated by requests for information, and ensure that such administrative burden is kept to a minimum and that the confidentiality of the information is respected.
6.   On the basis of the information collected through the monitoring activities carried out in accordance with paragraph 1, the Commission shall present a report on the aggregated findings to the Board.
7.   The Commission may ask the Board to discuss the aggregated findings and prospects of development based on the information obtained by Member States pursuant to paragraphs 1 and 4 regarding their monitoring of supply chains of goods and services of critical importance, and in that case shall ensure confidentiality and respect the commercial sensitivity of the information concerned.
8.   The Commission may also share relevant information with the Member States, obtained through other monitoring means or systems.
