Article 46
Report, review and evaluation
1.   By 29 November 2029, and every five years thereafter, the Commission shall carry out an evaluation of, and submit a report to the European Parliament and the Council on, the functioning and effectiveness of this Regulation.
2.   In addition, by four months after the deactivation of the internal market vigilance mode or the internal market emergency mode, as applicable, the Commission shall carry out an evaluation of, and submit a report to, the European Parliament and the Council on the measures implemented under this Regulation in relation to the crisis that led to the activation of that mode, in particular on the effectiveness of those measures.
3.   The reports referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 shall be accompanied, where appropriate, by relevant legislative proposals.
4.   The reports referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 shall include, in particular, an evaluation of the following:
(a)
the contribution of this Regulation to the smooth and efficient functioning of the internal market, in particular as regards the free movement of goods, services and persons and the avoidance of divergent national measures which would create cross-border restrictions;
(b)
the measures implemented under this Regulation, including an assessment of the principles of non-discrimination and proportionality, in particular:
(i)
the impact of the measures implemented under the contingency phase, in particular measures regarding stress tests, training and crisis protocols, digital tools, resilience and availability of goods;
(ii)
the impact of the measures implemented under the internal market vigilance mode;
(iii)
the impact of the measures implemented during the internal market emergency mode, and in particular on the fundamental rights enshrined in the Charter, namely as regards the freedom to conduct business, the freedom to seek employment and to work, and on the right to collective bargaining and action, including the right to strike;
(c)
the work of the Board, including its work in relation to the work of other relevant crisis-relevant bodies at Union level, in particular the IPCR, the Health Emergency Preparedness and Response Authority and UCPM;
(d)
the appropriateness of the criteria for the activation of the internal market vigilance mode or the internal market emergency mode, as appropriate.
5.   For the purpose of paragraphs 1 and 2, the competent authorities of the Member States and the Board shall provide the Commission with information upon its request.
Where necessary, the Commission may also request and obtain any relevant specialised or scientific knowledge from relevant Union bodies, offices and agencies.
