Article 9
Contingency framework
1.   The Commission, taking due consideration of the opinion of the Board and the input of relevant Union-level bodies, may adopt an implementing act to set out the detailed arrangements for a contingency framework regarding crisis preparedness, cooperation, exchange of information and crisis communication for the internal market vigilance and emergency modes. That implementing act shall set out the detailed arrangements for:
(a)
cooperation between the competent authorities of the Member States and Union-level bodies during the internal market vigilance and emergency modes;
(b)
secure exchange of information; and
(c)
a coordinated approach to crisis communication during the internal market vigilance and emergency modes vis-à-vis the public with a coordinating role for the Commission.
2.   The implementing act referred to in paragraph 1 shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 45(2).
3.   The Commission and the Member States shall ensure arrangements are in place for timely cooperation and secure exchange of information between the Commission, the relevant Union-level bodies and the Member States concerning:
(a)
an inventory of the competent authorities of the Member States, the central liaison offices designated in accordance with Article 8 and the single points of contact referred to in Article 24, including their contact details, assigned roles and responsibilities during the internal market vigilance and emergency modes under this Regulation, in accordance with national law;
(b)
consultation of the representatives of economic operators, including SMEs, on their initiatives and actions to mitigate and respond to potential internal market crises;
(c)
consultation of social partners on the implications, for the free movement of workers, of their initiatives and actions to mitigate and respond to a potential crisis;
(d)
technical level cooperation during the internal market vigilance and emergency modes;
(e)
risk and emergency communication, with a coordinating role for the Commission, taking into account existing structures.
4.   In order to ensure the operation of the framework established in accordance with paragraph 1, the Commission may conduct stress tests, simulations and in-action and after-action reviews with Member States, and propose that the relevant Union-level bodies and the Member States update the framework as necessary.
5.   In order to promote and facilitate the free movement of goods and services during an internal market emergency mode, the Commission shall assist Member States in coordinating their efforts in laying down single digital forms for the purpose of declaration, registration or authorisation of activities carried out between Member States.
