Article 23
Transparency
1.   Where the internal market emergency mode has been activated in accordance with Article 18(4), Member States shall communicate the text of any emergency measures taken in response to the crisis, without delay and after their adoption, to the Commission and to other Member States via the Union-level liaison office. That obligation shall only apply where those measures introduce restrictions on the exercise of the right to free movement of persons between Member States and are not already covered by an information or notification obligation provided for in other Union legislation. Such communication shall include:
(a)
the reasons for such measures, including reasons demonstrating that the measures are justified and proportionate, as well as any underlying scientific or other data supporting their adoption;
(b)
the scope of such measures;
(c)
the date of adoption and date of application and duration of those measures.
2.   Member States may communicate to the Commission and to other Member States via the Union-level liaison office the draft text of any measures referred in paragraph 1 before their adoption, together with the information referred to in points (a) to (c) of paragraph 1.
3.   The communication referred to in paragraph 2 shall not prevent Member States from adopting the measures in question.
4.   Member States shall provide the public and, at the same time, the Commission with clear, comprehensive and timely information explaining the measures referred to in paragraph 1 as soon as possible.
5.   The Commission shall coordinate the information exchange between Member States and, based on the information received pursuant to this Article, publish on a dedicated website, available in all official languages of the institutions of the Union, relevant information on any restrictions on the exercise of the right to free movement, including information on the scope and duration of the national measures in question, and, where possible, real-time information. That dedicated website may include an interactive map with relevant real-time information on those measures.
6.   The Commission shall make the information received pursuant to paragraphs 1, 2 and 4 available to the Board.
7.   The information referred to in paragraphs 1, 2 and 4 shall be transmitted via a secure tool provided by the Commission.
