Article 4
Internal Market Emergency and Resilience Board
1.   An Internal Market Emergency and Resilience Board (the ‘Board’) is established.
2.   The Board shall be composed of one representative from each Member State and one representative from the Commission. Each Member State shall appoint a representative and an alternate representative. In addition, Member States may appoint a sector-specific ad hoc representative if appropriate, depending on the nature of the crisis.
3.   A representative of the Commission shall chair the Board and the Commission shall provide the secretariat of the Board.
4.   The Chair of the Board (the ‘Chair’) shall invite a representative from the European Parliament as a permanent observer to the Board.
5.   The Chair may invite experts with specific knowledge to take part, as observers, in the work of the Board and to attend specific meetings, on an ad-hoc basis, where such attendance is relevant considering the agenda of the meeting. Such experts may include representatives of economic operators, stakeholder organisations and social partners.
6.   The Chair shall invite the representatives of other crisis-relevant bodies at Union level as observers to the relevant meetings of the Board.
7.   The Chair shall invite representatives of international organisations and countries outside the Union to relevant meetings of the Board in accordance with the relevant bilateral or international agreements.
8.   Observers shall not have voting rights and shall not participate in the formulation of opinions, recommendations or advice of the Board. Where appropriate, the Chair may invite those observers to contribute information and insights.
9.   The Board shall meet at least three times a year. At its first meeting, on a proposal by and in agreement with the Commission, the Board shall adopt its rules of procedure.
10.   The Board may adopt opinions, recommendations or reports in the context of its tasks set out in Article 5. The Commission shall, in a transparent manner, take the utmost account of those opinions, recommendations or reports.
