Article 10
Type approval
1.   With effect from 2 July 2007, if a manufacturer so requests, the national authorities may not, on grounds relating to emissions or fuel consumption of vehicles, refuse to grant EC type approval or national type approval for a new type of vehicle, or prohibit the registration, sale or entry into service of a new vehicle, where the vehicle concerned complies with this Regulation and its implementing measures, and in particular with the Euro 5 limit values set out in Table 1 of Annex I or with the Euro 6 limit values set out in Table 2 of Annex I.
2.   With effect from 1 September 2009, and from 1 September 2010 in the case of category N1 class II and III and category N2 vehicles, the national authorities shall refuse, on grounds relating to emissions or fuel consumption, to grant EC type approval or national type approval for new types of vehicle which do not comply with this Regulation and its implementing measures, and in particular with the Annexes, with the exception of the Euro 6 limit values set out in Table 2 of Annex I. For the test on tailpipe emissions, the limit values applied to vehicles designed to fulfil specific social needs shall be the same as for category N1 class III vehicles.
3.   With effect from 1 January 2011, and from 1 January 2012 in the case of category N1 class II and III and category N2 vehicles and vehicles designed to fulfil specific social needs, national authorities shall, in the case of new vehicles which do not comply with this Regulation and its implementing measures, and in particular with the Annexes with the exception of the Euro 6 limit values set out in Table 2 of Annex I, consider certificates of conformity to be no longer valid for the purposes of Article 7(1) of Directive 70/156/EEC and shall, on grounds relating to emissions or fuel consumption, prohibit the registration, sale or entry into service of such vehicles. For the test on tailpipe emissions, the limit values applied to vehicles designed to fulfil specific social needs shall be the same as for category N1 class III vehicles.
4.   With effect from 1 September 2014, and from 1 September 2015 in the case of category N1 class II and III and category N2 vehicles, the national authorities shall refuse, on grounds relating to emissions or fuel consumption, to grant EC type approval or national type approval for new types of vehicle which do not comply with this Regulation and its implementing measures, and in particular with the Euro 6 limit values set out in Table 2 of Annex I.
5.   With effect from 1 September 2015, and from 1 September 2016 in the case of category N1 class II and III and category N2 vehicles, national authorities shall, in the case of new vehicles which do not comply with this Regulation and its implementing measures, and in particular with the Euro 6 limit values set out in Table 2 of Annex I, consider certificates of conformity to be no longer valid for the purposes of Article 7(1) of Directive 70/156/EEC and shall, on grounds relating to emissions or fuel consumption, prohibit the registration, sale or entry into service of such vehicles.
