Article 4
Manufacturers’ obligations
1.   Manufacturers shall demonstrate that all new vehicles sold, registered or put into service in the Community are type approved in accordance with this Regulation and its implementing measures. Manufacturers shall also demonstrate that all new replacement pollution control devices requiring type approval which are sold or put into service in the Community are type approved in accordance with this Regulation and its implementing measures.
These obligations include meeting the emission limits set out in Annex I and the implementing measures referred to in Article 5.
2.   Manufacturers shall ensure that type approval procedures for verifying conformity of production, durability of pollution control devices and in-service conformity are met.
In addition, the technical measures taken by the manufacturer must be such as to ensure that the tailpipe and evaporative emissions are effectively limited, pursuant to this Regulation, throughout the normal life of the vehicles under normal conditions of use. Therefore, in-service conformity measures shall be checked for a period of up to five years or 100 000 km, whichever is the sooner. Durability testing of pollution control devices undertaken for type approval shall cover 160 000 km. To comply with this durability test, the manufacturers should have the possibility to make use of test bench ageing, subject to the implementing measures referred to in paragraph 4.
In-service conformity shall be checked, in particular, for tailpipe emissions as tested against emission limits set out in Annex I. In order to improve control of evaporative emissions and low ambient temperature emissions, the test procedures shall be reviewed by the Commission.
3.   Manufacturers shall set out carbon dioxide emissions and fuel consumption figures in a document given to the purchaser of the vehicle at the time of purchase.
4.   The specific procedures and requirements for the implementation of paragraphs 2 and 3 shall be established in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 15(2).
