Article 14
Redefinition of specifications
1.   The Commission shall consider including methane emissions in the calculation of carbon dioxide emissions. If necessary, the Commission shall present a proposal to the European Parliament and the Council with measures to account for, or limit, methane emissions.
2.   After the completion of the UN/ECE Particulate Measurement Programme, conducted under the auspices of the World Forum for Harmonisation of Vehicle Regulations, and at the latest upon entry into force of Euro 6, the Commission shall adopt the following measures, which are designed to amend non-essential elements of this Regulation, inter alia by supplementing it, without lowering the existing ambition level with regard to the environment:
(a)
amendment of this Regulation in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 15(3) for the purpose of recalibrating the particulate mass based limit values set out in Annex I to this Regulation, and introducing particle number based limit values in that Annex so that they correlate broadly with the petrol and diesel mass limit values;
(b)
adoption of a revised measurement procedure for particulates and a particle number limit value, in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 15(3).
3.   The Commission shall keep under review the procedures, tests and requirements referred to in Article 5(3) as well as the test cycles used to measure emissions. If the review finds that these are no longer adequate or no longer reflect real world emissions, they shall be adapted so as to adequately reflect the emissions generated by real driving on the road. The necessary measures, which are designed to amend non-essential elements of this Regulation, by supplementing it, shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 15(3).
4.   The Commission shall keep under review the pollutants subject to the requirements and tests referred to in Article 5(3). If the Commission concludes that it is appropriate to regulate the emissions of additional pollutants it shall present a proposal to the European Parliament and to the Council to amend this Regulation accordingly.
5.   The Commission shall review the emission limits set out in Table 4 of Annex I for the carbon monoxide and hydrocarbon tailpipe emissions after a cold start test and shall present, as appropriate, a proposal to the European Parliament and to the Council with a view to tightening the emission limits.
6.   The relevant Annexes of Directive 2005/55/EC shall be amended in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 15(3) so that they contain requirements for the type approval of all vehicles covered by the scope of that Directive.
