Whereas:
(1)
Council Directive 90/377/EEC of 29 June 1990 concerning a Community procedure to improve the transparency of gas and electricity prices charged to industrial end-users (2) has been significantly amended on several occasions (3). Now that new amendments are being made to the said Directive, it is desirable, for reasons of clarity, that the provisions in question should be recast.
(2)
Energy price transparency, to the extent that it reinforces the conditions ensuring that competition is not distorted in the common market, is essential to the achievement and smooth functioning of the internal energy market.
(3)
Transparency can help to obviate discrimination against users by increasing their freedom to choose between different energy sources and different suppliers.
(4)
At present, the degree of transparency varies from one energy source and one Member State or one Community region to another, thus calling into question the achievement of an internal energy market.
(5)
However, the price paid by industry in the Community for the energy which it uses is one of the factors which influence its competitiveness and should therefore remain confidential.
(6)
The system of standard consumers used by the Statistical Office of the European Communities (Eurostat) in its price publications and the price system introduced for major industrial electricity users ensure that transparency is not an obstacle to confidentiality.
(7)
It is necessary to extend the consumer categories used by Eurostat up to the limits at which the consumers remain representative.
(8)
In this way end-users price transparency would be achieved without endangering the necessary confidentiality of contracts. In order to respect confidentiality there must be at least three consumers in a given consumption category for a price to be published.
(9)
This information, which concerns gas and electricity consumed by industry for energy end-users, will also enable comparisons to be drawn with other energy sources (oil, coal, fossil and renewable energy sources) and other consumers.
(10)
Undertakings which supply gas and electricity as well as industrial gas and electricity consumers remain, independently of the application of this Directive, subject to the Treaty’s competition rules and consequently the Commission can require communication of prices and conditions of sale.
(11)
Knowledge of the price systems in force forms part of price transparency.
(12)
Knowledge of the breakdown of consumers by category and their respective market shares also forms part of price transparency.
(13)
The communication to Eurostat of prices and conditions of sale to consumers and price systems in operation as well as the breakdown of consumers by consumption category should inform the Commission sufficiently for it to decide, as necessary, on appropriate action or proposals in the light of the situation of the internal energy market.
(14)
The data supplied to Eurostat will be more reliable if the undertakings themselves compile these data.
(15)
Familiarity with the taxation and parafiscal charges existing in each Member State is important to ensure price transparency.
(16)
It must be possible to check the reliability of the data supplied to Eurostat.
(17)
The achievement of transparency presupposes the publication and circulation of prices and price systems as widely as possible among consumers.
(18)
To implement energy price transparency the system should be based on the proven expertise and methods developed and applied by Eurostat regarding the processing, checking and publication of data.
(19)
With the prospect of the achievement of the internal market in energy, the system of price transparency should be rendered operational as soon as possible.
(20)
The uniform implementation of this Directive can only take place in all the Member States when the natural gas market, in particular with regard to infrastructure, has reached a sufficient level of development.
(21)
The measures necessary for the implementation of this Directive should be adopted in accordance with Council Decision 1999/468/EC of 28 June 1999 laying down the procedures for the exercise of implementing powers conferred on the Commission (4).
(22)
In particular, the Commission should be empowered to make the necessary changes to Annexes I and II in the light of specific problems identified. Since those measures are of general scope and are designed to amend non-essential elements of this Directive, they must be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny provided for in Article 5a of Decision 1999/468/EC.
(23)
Since the new elements introduced into this Directive concern committee procedure only, they do not need to be transposed by the Member States.
(24)
This Directive should be without prejudice to the obligations of the Member States relating to the time limits for transposition into national law of the Directives set out in Annex III, Part B,
HAVE ADOPTED THIS DIRECTIVE:
