Article 56
Related requirements for parts or equipment that may pose a serious risk to the correct functioning of essential systems
1.   A manufacturer of parts or equipment may apply for the authorisation referred to in Article 55(1) by submitting to the approval authority an application accompanied by a test report that is drafted by a technical service and that certifies that the parts or equipment for which authorisation is sought comply with the requirements referred to in Article 55(3). Such manufacturer may submit only one application for each type of part or equipment and to one approval authority only.
2.   The application for the authorisation shall include details of the manufacturer of the parts or equipment, the type, the identification and part numbers of the parts or equipment, the vehicle manufacturer's name, the type of vehicle and, where appropriate, the year of construction and any other information permitting the identification of the vehicle to which the parts or equipment are to be fitted.
The approval authority shall authorise the placing on the market and the entering into service of the parts or equipment where it finds, taking into account the test report referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article and other evidence, that the parts or equipment in question comply with the requirements referred to in Article 55(3).
The approval authority shall issue to the manufacturer an authorisation certificate without delay.
The Commission shall adopt implementing acts laying down the template and the numbering system for the authorisation certificate referred to in the third subparagraph of this paragraph. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 83(2).
3.   The manufacturer shall inform without delay the approval authority that issued the authorisation of any change affecting the conditions under which the authorisation has been issued. That approval authority shall decide whether the authorisation has to be reviewed or reissued and whether further tests are necessary.
The manufacturer shall ensure that the parts or equipment are produced and continue to be produced under the conditions under which the authorisation has been issued.
4.   Before issuing any authorisation, the approval authority shall verify the existence of arrangements and procedures for ensuring effective control of the conformity of production.
Where the approval authority finds that the conditions for issuing the authorisation are no longer fulfilled, it shall request the manufacturer to take the necessary measures to ensure that the parts or equipment are brought into conformity. Where necessary, it shall withdraw the authorisation.
5.   Upon request of a national authority of another Member State, the approval authority that has issued the authorisation shall, within one month of the receipt of that request, send to the former a copy of the issued authorisation certificate together with its attachments by means of a common secure electronic exchange system. The copy may also take the form of a secure electronic file.
6.   An approval authority that disagrees with the authorisation issued by another Member State shall bring the reasons for its disagreement to the attention of the Commission. The Commission shall take the appropriate measures in order to resolve the disagreement. Inter alia, the Commission may, where necessary and after having consulted the relevant approval authorities, adopt implementing acts requiring the withdrawal of the authorisation. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 83(2).
7.   Until the list referred to in Article 55(4) has been established, Member States may maintain national provisions regarding parts or equipment that may affect the correct functioning of systems essential for the safety of the vehicle or its environmental performance.
CHAPTER XII

INTERNATIONAL REGULATIONS

