Article 61
Manufacturers' obligations to provide vehicle OBD information and vehicle repair and maintenance information
1.   Manufacturers shall provide to independent operators unrestricted, standardised and non-discriminatory access to vehicle OBD information, diagnostic and other equipment, tools including the complete references, and available downloads, of the applicable software and vehicle repair and maintenance information. Information shall be presented in an easily accessible manner in the form of machine-readable and electronically processable datasets. Independent operators shall have access to the remote diagnosis services used by manufacturers and authorised dealers and repairers.
Manufacturers shall provide a standardised, secure and remote facility to enable independent repairers to complete operations that involve access to the vehicle security system.
2.   Until the Commission has adopted a relevant standard through the work of the European Committee for Standardisation (CEN) or a comparable standardisation body, the vehicle OBD information and vehicle repair and maintenance information shall be presented in an easily accessible manner that can be processed with reasonable effort by independent operators.
The vehicle OBD information and the vehicle repair and maintenance information shall be made available on the websites of manufacturers using a standardised format or, if this is not feasible, due to the nature of the information, in another appropriate format. For independent operators other than repairers, the information shall also be given in a machine-readable format that is capable of being electronically processed with commonly available information technology tools and software and which allows independent operators to carry out the task associated with their business in the aftermarket supply chain.
3.   However, in the following cases, it shall be sufficient that the manufacturer provides the required information promptly in an easily accessible manner when an independent operator so requests:
(a)
for vehicle types covered by a national type-approval of vehicles produced in small series as referred to in Article 42;
(b)
for special purpose vehicles;
(c)
for vehicle types of categories O1 and O2 that do not use diagnostic tools or a physical or wireless communication with the on-board electronic control unit or units for the purpose of diagnostics or reprogramming of their vehicles;
(d)
for the final stage of type-approval in a multi-stage type-approval procedure, where the final stage only covers bodywork which does not contain electronic vehicle control systems, and all electronic vehicle control systems of the base vehicle remain unchanged.
4.   The details of the technical requirements for access to vehicle OBD information and vehicle repair and maintenance information, in particular technical specifications on how vehicle OBD information and vehicle repair and maintenance information are to be provided, are laid down in Annex X.
5.   Manufacturers shall also make training material available to independent operators and authorised dealers and repairers.
6.   Manufacturers shall ensure that the vehicle OBD information and the vehicle repair and maintenance information are always accessible, except as required for maintenance purposes of the information system.
Manufacturers shall make any subsequent amendments and supplements to vehicle OBD information and vehicle repair and maintenance information available on their websites at the same time they are made available to authorised repairers.
7.   For the purposes of manufacturing and servicing of OBD-compatible replacement or service parts and diagnostic tools and test equipment, manufacturers shall provide the relevant vehicle OBD information and vehicle repair and maintenance information on a non-discriminatory basis to any interested manufacturer or repairer of components, diagnostic tools or test equipment.
8.   For the purposes of the design, manufacturing and the repair of automotive equipment for alternative-fuel vehicles, manufacturers shall provide the relevant vehicle OBD information and vehicle repair and maintenance information on a non-discriminatory basis to any interested manufacturer, installer or repairer of equipment for alternative-fuel vehicles.
9.   Where repair and maintenance records of a vehicle are kept in a central database of the vehicle manufacturer or on its behalf, independent repairers shall have access to such records free of charge and shall be able to enter information on repair and maintenance which they have performed.
10.   This Chapter shall not apply to vehicles that are covered by individual vehicle approvals.
11.   The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 82, amending Annex X to take account of technical and regulatory developments or prevent misuse by updating the requirements concerning the access to vehicle OBD information and vehicle repair and maintenance information, including the repair and maintenance activities supported by wireless wide area networks and by adopting and integrating the standards referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article. The Commission shall take into account current information technology, foreseeable vehicle technology developments, existing ISO standards and the possibility of a worldwide ISO standard.
