Article 6
Obligations of Member States
1.   Member States shall establish or appoint their own approval authorities and market surveillance authorities. Member States shall notify the Commission of the establishment and appointment of those authorities.
That notification shall include the name of those authorities, their address, including their electronic address, and their areas of responsibility. The Commission shall publish on its website a list and contact details of the approval authorities and the market surveillance authorities.
Member States shall ensure that their own approval authorities and market surveillance authorities adhere to a strict separation of roles and responsibilities and that they each function independently from each other. Those authorities may be within the same organisation provided that their activities are managed autonomously as part of separate structures.
2.   A Member State where more than one approval authority is responsible for vehicle approval including individual vehicle approval shall designate one of them that has the competence for issuing type-approvals as the sole approval authority that is responsible for the exchange of information with the approval authorities of other Member States for the purpose of Article 11 and for the fulfilment of obligations set out in Chapter XV.
3.   A Member State where more than one market surveillance authority is responsible for market surveillance shall designate one of them as the sole market surveillance authority that is responsible for the exchange of information with the market surveillance authorities of other Member States for the purpose of Article 11.
4.   Member States shall only permit the placing on the market, the registration or the entry into service of vehicles, systems, components and separate technical units that comply with this Regulation.
5.   Member States shall not prohibit, restrict or impede the placing on the market, the registration or the entry into service of vehicles, systems, components or separate technical units that comply with this Regulation, except in the cases provided for in Chapter XI.
By way of derogation from the first subparagraph of this paragraph, Member States may decide not to allow the circulation on the road, the placing on the market, the registration or the entry into service of vehicles that have been type-approved in accordance with this Regulation, but that exceed the harmonised dimensions, weights and axle loads laid down in Annex I to Council Directive 96/53/EC (17).
6.   Member States shall organise and carry out market surveillance and controls of vehicles, systems, components and separate technical units entering the market, in accordance with this Regulation and Chapter III of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008.
7.   Member States shall take the necessary measures to ensure that market surveillance authorities are entitled, where they consider it necessary and justified, to enter the premises of economic operators on their territory and to take any necessary samples of vehicles, systems, components and separate technical units for the purposes of compliance testing.
8.   The Member States shall periodically review and assess the functioning of their type-approval activities. Such reviews and assessments shall be carried out at least every four years, and the results thereof shall be communicated to the Commission and the Forum for Exchange of Information on Enforcement referred to in Article 11 (‘the Forum’).
The Member States shall make accessible to the public a summary of the results of periodic reviews and assessments.
The Member States shall report to the Commission and the Forum on how they address any recommendations referred to in Article 11(5) issued by the Forum.
9.   The Member States shall periodically review and assess the functioning of their market surveillance activities. Such reviews and assessments shall be carried out at least every four years and the results thereof shall be communicated to the Commission and to the Forum.
The Member States shall make accessible to the public a summary of the results of periodic reviews and assessments.
The Member States shall report to the Commission and the Forum on how they address any recommendations referred to in Article 11(5) issued by the Forum.
10.   The Commission may adopt implementing acts laying down the common criteria for the format of reporting on the reviews and assessments referred to in paragraphs 8 and 9 of this Article. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 83(2).
