Article 17
Obligations of importers concerning their vehicles, systems, components, separate technical units, parts and equipment that are not in conformity or that present a serious risk
1.   Where a vehicle, system, component, separate technical unit, part or equipment that has been placed on the market by importers is not in conformity with this Regulation, importers shall immediately take the corrective measures necessary to bring that vehicle, system, component, separate technical unit, part or equipment into conformity under the manufacturer's supervision, to withdraw it from the market or to recall it, as appropriate. Importers shall also inform the manufacturer and the approval authority that granted the EU type-approval.
2.   Where a vehicle, system, component, separate technical unit, part or equipment that has been placed on the market presents a serious risk, importers shall immediately provide detailed information on the serious risk to the manufacturers and the approval authorities and market surveillance authorities.
Importers shall also inform the approval authorities and market surveillance authorities of any action taken and give details, in particular of the serious risk and of any measure taken by the manufacturer.
3.   Importers shall, for a period of 10 years after the end of the validity of EU type-approval of a vehicle and for a period of five years after the end of the validity of the EU type-approval of a system, component or separate technical unit, keep a copy of the EU type-approval certificate and its attachments referred to in Article 28(1), and shall ensure that they can be made available to the approval authorities and market surveillance authorities upon request.
4.   Importers shall, following a reasoned request from a national authority, provide that authority with all information and documentation necessary to demonstrate the conformity of a vehicle, system, component or separate technical unit, in a language that can be easily understood by that authority.
Importers shall, following a reasoned request from a national authority, cooperate with that authority on any action taken in accordance with Article 20 of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 to eliminate the risks posed by the vehicle, system, component, separate technical unit, part or equipment that they have made available on the market.
