Article 12
Online data exchange
1.   The Commission and the Member States shall use the common secure electronic exchange system referred to in Article 27 for EU type-approval certificates and their attachments referred to in Article 28(1), including for any test reports as well as amendments, refusals or withdrawals of any EU type-approval.
The Commission and Member States shall use the Rapid Information System (RAPEX), established under Directive 2001/95/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (18) and the Information and Communication System on Market Surveillance (ICSMS), established under Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 for market surveillance, recalls and other relevant activities between market surveillance authorities, Member States and the Commission.
2.   From 5 July 2026, Member States shall make accessible to the public, by vehicle identification number, the certificate of conformity of each vehicle as structured data in electronic format in the common secure electronic exchange system, in accordance with Article 37.
From 5 July 2026, Member States shall make accessible to the public the information contained in the certificate of conformity, excluding vehicle identification numbers, as structured data in electronic format in the common secure electronic exchange system, in accordance with Article 37.
The Commission shall adopt implementing acts establishing the format of, and the criteria for public access to, the information referred to in the first and second subparagraphs of this paragraph. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 83(2).
3.   The Commission shall take all necessary measures to establish an interface between the common secure electronic exchange system referred to in Article 27, RAPEX and ICSMS in order to facilitate market surveillance activities and ensure coordination, consistency and accuracy of the information provided to consumers and third parties.
4.   Member States shall use the common secure electronic exchange system referred to in Article 27, in order to make a list of the EU type-approvals for vehicles, systems, components and separate technical units that they have granted, amended, refused or withdrawn, as well as a list of the technical services which have performed the tests for the respective EU type-approvals, accessible to the public as from 1 September 2022.
The Commission shall adopt implementing acts establishing the format of, and the criteria for public access to, the information referred to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 83(2).
5.   The Commission shall develop a tool to make publicly accessible test results and complaints about the performance of vehicles, systems, components and separate technical units from recognised third parties that meet the requirements laid down by the implementing acts referred to in Article 13(10).
