Article 31
Conformity of production arrangements
1.   An approval authority that has granted an EU type-approval shall take the necessary measures in accordance with Annex IV to verify, if necessary in cooperation with the approval authorities of the other Member States, that the manufacturer produces the vehicles, systems, components or separate technical units in conformity with the approved type.
2.   An approval authority that has granted a whole-vehicle type-approval shall verify a statistically relevant number of samples of vehicles and certificates of conformity on their compliance with Articles 36 and 37 and shall verify that the data in those certificates of conformity are correct.
3.   An approval authority that has granted an EU type-approval shall take the necessary measures to verify, if necessary in cooperation with the approval authorities of the other Member States, that the arrangements referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article continue to be adequate so that vehicles, systems, components or separate technical units in production continue to conform to the approved type and that certificates of conformity continue to comply with Articles 36 and 37.
4.   In order to verify that a vehicle, system, component or separate technical unit conforms to the approved type, the approval authority that granted the EU type-approval shall take the necessary measures to carry out the checks or tests on samples taken at the manufacturer's premises, including production facilities that are required for EU type-approval.
In accordance with Annex IV, the approval authority shall take the necessary measures to carry out such checks or tests with the frequency set out in the regulatory acts listed in Annex II, or, if no frequency is specified in those acts, at least once every three years.
5.   In order to verify that a vehicle, system, component or separate technical unit conforms to the approved type, the approval authority or the technical services shall:
(a)
if a range of values is provided for in the test procedures laid down in the relevant regulatory acts listed in Annex II, set the values in a random manner within the provided range when carrying out checks or tests; and
(b)
have access to the software, algorithms, documentation and any additional information in accordance with Article 25(4).
6.   An approval authority that has granted an EU type-approval shall take the necessary measures to verify that the manufacturer complies with the obligations set out in Chapter XIV. It shall verify in particular whether, in order to comply with those obligations, the manufacturer has amended or supplemented the vehicle OBD information and vehicle repair and maintenance information.
7.   Where an approval authority that has granted an EU type-approval establishes that the manufacturer no longer produces the vehicles, systems, components or separate technical units in conformity with the approved type or with the requirements of this Regulation, or establishes that the certificates of conformity no longer comply with Articles 36 and 37, even though production is continued, it shall take the necessary measures to ensure that the arrangements for conformity of production are followed correctly or withdraw the type-approval. The approval authority may decide to take all necessary restrictive measures in accordance with Chapter XI.
8.   The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 82, amending Annex IV to take account of technological and regulatory developments by updating the conformity of production procedures.
