Article 76
Monitoring of technical services
1.   The designating type-approval authority shall continuously monitor the technical services to ensure compliance with the requirements laid down in Articles 68 to 72, in Articles 80 and 81 and in Appendix 2 to Annex III.
The first subparagraph of this paragraph shall not apply to any activities of technical services which are monitored by accreditation bodies in accordance with Article 67(1) for the purposes of ensuring compliance with the requirements laid down in Articles 68 to 72, in Articles 80 and 81 and in Appendix 2 to Annex III.
Technical services shall supply on request all relevant information and documents that are required to enable the designating type-approval authority or national accreditation body to verify compliance with those requirements.
Technical services shall inform the designating type-approval authority or national accreditation body without delay of any changes, in particular regarding their personnel, facilities, subsidiaries or subcontractors, which may affect compliance with the requirements set out in Articles 68 to 72, in Articles 80 and 81 and in Appendix 2 to Annex III, or their ability to perform the conformity assessment tasks relating to the vehicles, systems, components and separate technical units for which they have been designated.
2.   Technical services shall respond without delay to requests by a type-approval authority or by the Commission in relation to the conformity assessments they have carried out.
3.   The designating type-approval authority shall ensure that the technical service carries out its obligation laid down in paragraph 2 of this Article, unless there is a legitimate reason for not doing so.
Where that type-approval authority acknowledges a legitimate reason, it shall inform the Commission thereof.
The Commission shall consult the Member States without delay. On the basis of that consultation, the Commission shall adopt implementing acts to decide if the legitimate reason is justified or not. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 83(2).
The technical service and the designating type-approval authority may request that any information that is transmitted to the type-approval authority of another Member State or to the Commission shall be treated confidentially.
4.   At least every 30 months, the designating type-approval authority shall assess whether each technical service under its responsibility continues to satisfy the requirements set out in Articles 68 to 72, in Articles 80 and 81 and in Appendix 2 to Annex III. That assessment shall include an on-site assessment of each technical service under its responsibility.
Within two months after finalising the assessment of the technical service, each Member State shall report to the Commission and to the other Member States on its monitoring activities. Those reports shall contain a summary of the assessment, which shall be made publicly available.
