Article 55
Placing on the market and entry into service of parts or equipment that may pose a serious risk to the correct functioning of essential systems
1.   Parts or equipment that may pose a serious risk to the correct functioning of systems that are essential for the safety of the vehicle or for its environmental performance shall not be placed on the market, shall not enter into service, and shall be prohibited, unless they have been authorised by an approval authority in accordance with Article 56.
2.   Such authorisations shall only apply to the limited number of parts or equipment, that are included in the list referred to in paragraph 4.
3.   The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 82, supplementing this Regulation by laying down the requirements for the authorisation of the parts and equipment referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article.
Those requirements may be based on the regulatory acts listed in Annex II or may consist of a comparison of the environmental or safety performance of the parts or equipment with the environmental or safety performance of the original parts or equipment, as appropriate. In either case, the requirements shall ensure that the parts or equipment do not impair the functioning of the systems that are essential for the safety of the vehicle or for its environmental performance.
4.   The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 82, amending Annex VI to take account of technical and regulatory developments by laying down and updating the list of parts or equipment on the basis of an evaluation of the following:
(a)
the extent to which there exists a serious risk to the safety or environmental performance of vehicles that are fitted with the parts or equipment in question;
(b)
the potential effect on consumers and aftermarket manufacturers of a possible authorisation of the parts or equipment under Article 56(1).
5.   Paragraph 1 shall not apply to original parts or equipment or to parts or equipment belonging to a system that has been type-approved in accordance with the regulatory acts listed in Annex II, except where the type-approval relates to aspects other than the serious risk referred to in paragraph 1.
For the purposes of this Article, original parts or equipment means parts or equipment that are manufactured according to the specifications and production standards provided by the vehicle manufacturer for the assembly of the vehicle in question.
6.   Paragraph 1 of this Article shall not apply to parts or equipment that are exclusively produced for racing vehicles. Parts or equipment listed in Annex VI that are used both in racing and on the road shall only be made available on the market for vehicles intended for use on public roads, if they comply with the requirements laid down in the delegated acts referred to in paragraph 3 of this Article and have been authorised by the Commission. The Commission shall adopt implementing acts to decide whether to grant those authorisations. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 83(2).
