Article 16
Obligations of importers
1.   Importers shall only place on the market vehicles, systems, components or separate technical units that comply with this Regulation.
2.   Before placing on the market a type-approved vehicle, system, component or separate technical unit, importers shall verify that it is covered by a valid EU type-approval certificate and that the system, component or separate technical unit bears the required type-approval mark and complies with Article 13(8).
In the case of a vehicle, the importer shall ensure that the vehicle is accompanied by the required certificate of conformity.
3.   Where a vehicle, system, component or separate technical unit is not in conformity with the requirements of this Regulation, and in particular where it does not correspond to its type-approval, importers shall not place on the market, allow to enter into service or register the vehicle, system, component or separate technical unit, until it has been brought into conformity.
4.   Where a vehicle, system, component, separate technical unit, part or equipment presents a serious risk, importers shall inform the manufacturer and the market surveillance authorities thereof. For type-approved vehicles, systems, components and separate technical units, importers shall also inform the approval authority that granted the type-approval.
5.   Importers shall indicate their name, registered trade name or registered trade mark, and their contact address on the vehicle, component, separate technical unit, part or equipment, or, where this is not possible, on its packaging or in a document accompanying the component, separate technical unit, part or equipment.
6.   Importers shall ensure that the vehicle, system, component or separate technical unit is accompanied by instructions and information, as required by Article 59, in the official language or languages of the Member States concerned.
7.   To protect the health and safety of consumers, importers shall keep a record of complaints and recalls relating to vehicles, systems, components, separate technical units, parts or equipment that they have placed on the market, and shall keep their distributors informed of such complaints and recalls.
8.   Importers shall immediately inform the relevant manufacturer of any complaints they received regarding risks, suspected incidents or non-compliance issues relating to vehicles, systems, components, separate technical units, parts or equipment that they have placed on the market.
9.   Importers shall ensure that, while a vehicle, system, component or separate technical unit is under their responsibility, storage or transport conditions do not jeopardise its compliance with the requirements laid down in this Regulation.
