Article 52
National procedures for dealing with vehicles, systems, components and separate technical units presenting a serious risk or non-compliance
1.   Where, after having performed the evaluation pursuant to Article 51, the market surveillance authority of one Member State finds that a vehicle, system, component or separate technical unit presents a serious risk to the health or safety of persons or to other aspects of the protection of public interests covered by this Regulation, it shall require without delay that the relevant economic operator take all appropriate corrective measures without delay to ensure that the vehicle, system, component or separate technical unit concerned, when placed on the market, registered or entered into service, no longer presents that risk.
2.   Where, after having performed the evaluation pursuant to Article 51, the market surveillance authority of one Member State finds that a vehicle, system, component or separate technical unit does not comply with this Regulation, but does not present a serious risk as referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article, it shall require without delay that the relevant economic operator take all appropriate corrective measures within a reasonable period to bring a vehicle, system, component or separate technical unit into compliance. That period shall be proportionate to the seriousness of non-compliance to ensure that the vehicle, system, component or separate technical unit concerned is compliant when it is placed on the market, is registered, or enters into service.
Economic operators shall, in accordance with the obligations set out in Articles 13 to 21, ensure that all appropriate corrective measures are taken in respect of all concerned vehicles, systems, components or separate technical units that they have placed on the market, registered or entered into service in the Union.
3.   Where economic operators do not take adequate corrective measures within the relevant period referred to in paragraph 1 or 2, or where the risk requires rapid action, the national authorities shall take all appropriate provisional restrictive measures to prohibit or restrict the making available on the market, the registration or the entry into service of the concerned vehicles, systems, components or separate technical units, on their national market, or to withdraw them from that market or to recall them.
Article 21 of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 shall apply to the restrictive measures referred to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph.
4.   The Commission may adopt implementing acts laying down a classification of the seriousness of the non-compliance and the appropriate measures to be taken by national authorities to ensure the uniform application of this Article. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 83(2).
