Article 65
Compliance with the obligations regarding access to vehicle OBD information and vehicle repair and maintenance information
1.   An approval authority may at any time, whether on its own initiative, on the basis of a complaint, or on the basis of an assessment by a technical service, check that a manufacturer is in compliance with this Chapter and with the Manufacturer's certificate on access to vehicle OBD information and vehicle repair and maintenance information referred to in Appendix 1 to Annex X.
2.   Where an approval authority finds that the manufacturer has failed to comply with its obligations regarding access to vehicle OBD information and vehicle repair and maintenance information, the approval authority that granted the relevant type-approval shall take appropriate measures to remedy the situation.
Those measures may include the withdrawal or suspension of the type-approval, fines or other measures adopted pursuant to Article 84.
3.   Where an independent operator or a trade association representing independent operators files a complaint to the approval authority on the failure of the manufacturer to comply with this Chapter, the approval authority shall carry out an audit in order to verify compliance by the manufacturer. The approval authority shall request the approval authority that granted the whole vehicle type-approval to investigate the complaint and subsequently to ask for evidence from the vehicle manufacturer demonstrating that the system that the vehicle manufacturer has in place is in compliance with this Regulation. The results of that investigation shall be communicated to the national approval authority and the independent operator or trade association concerned within three months of the request.
4.   When carrying out the audit, the approval authority may ask a technical service or any other independent expert to carry out an assessment to verify whether the obligations concerning access to vehicle OBD information and vehicle repair and maintenance information have been met.
