Article 43
Validity of a national type-approval of vehicles produced in small series
1.   The validity of a national type-approval of vehicles produced in small series shall be restricted to the territory of the Member State of the approval authority that has granted that type-approval.
2.   At the request of the manufacturer, the approval authority shall send to the approval authorities of the Member States chosen by the manufacturer a copy of the national type-approval certificate, including the relevant parts of the information package referred to in Article 26(4), either by registered mail or electronic mail.
3.   The approval authorities of the Member States shall accept the national type-approval, unless they have reasonable grounds to believe that the national technical requirements in accordance with which the type of vehicle has been approved are not equivalent to their own.
4.   Within two months of receipt of the documents referred to in paragraph 2, the approval authorities of Member States chosen by the manufacturer shall communicate to the approval authority that granted the national type-approval their decision to accept the type-approval or not. Where no such decision has been communicated within that two-month period, the national type-approval shall be deemed to have been accepted.
5.   At the request of an applicant who wishes to place on the market, register or enter into service in another Member State a vehicle with a national type-approval of vehicles produced in small series, the approval authority that granted the national type-approval of vehicles produced in small series shall provide the national authority of the other Member State with a copy of the type-approval certificate, including the relevant parts of the information package.
The national authority of the other Member State shall permit the placing on the market, registration or entry into service of such vehicle, unless it has reasonable grounds to believe that the national technical requirements in accordance with which the type of vehicle has been approved are not equivalent to its own.
CHAPTER IX

INDIVIDUAL VEHICLE APPROVALS

