Article 75
Changes to and renewal of designations of technical services
1.   Where the type-approval authority has ascertained or has been informed that a technical service no longer complies with the requirements laid down in this Regulation, that type-approval authority shall restrict, suspend or withdraw the designation, as appropriate, depending on the seriousness of the failure to comply with those requirements.
The type-approval authority shall immediately notify to the Commission and the type-approval authorities of the other Member States any restriction, suspension or withdrawal of a designation.
The Commission shall update the list referred to in Article 74(3) accordingly.
2.   In the event of a restriction, suspension or withdrawal of the designation, or where the technical service has ceased its activity, the type-approval authority shall keep the files of that technical service available for the approval authorities or for the market surveillance authorities or transfer those files to another technical service chosen by the manufacturer in agreement with that technical service.
3.   The type-approval authority shall assess within three months of the notification referred to in the second subparagraph of paragraph 1 whether the non-compliance of the technical service has an impact on EU type-approval certificates issued on the basis of the inspection and test reports issued by the technical service subject of the change in designation and inform the other type-approval authorities and the Commission accordingly.
Within two months after having notified the changes to the designation, the type-approval authority shall submit a report on its findings regarding the non-compliance to the Commission and the other type-approval authorities. Where necessary to ensure the safety of vehicles, systems, components or separate technical units already placed on the market, the designating type-approval authority shall instruct the type-approval authorities concerned to suspend or withdraw within a reasonable period of time, any EU type-approval certificates which were unduly issued.
4.   Where the designation of technical services has been restricted, suspended or withdrawn, the EU type-approval certificates which were issued on the basis of inspection and test reports issued by those technical services shall remain valid unless those type-approvals become invalid in accordance with point (f) of Article 35(2).
5.   Extensions of the scope of the technical service's designation that lead to the designation of an additional category of activities referred to in Article 68(1) shall be assessed in accordance with the procedure set out in Article 73.
Extensions of the scope of a technical service's designation only for the regulatory acts listed in Annex II may be carried out in accordance with the procedures laid down in Appendix 2 to Annex III, and subject to the notification referred to in Article 74.
6.   The designation of a technical service shall only be renewed after the type-approval authority has verified that the technical service continues to comply with the requirements of this Regulation. That assessment shall be carried out in accordance with the procedure set out in Article 73.
