Article 54
Non-compliant EU type-approval
1.   Where an approval authority finds that a type-approval that has been granted does not comply with this Regulation, it shall refuse to recognise that approval.
2.   The approval authority shall notify its refusal to the approval authority that granted the EU type-approval, to the approval authorities of the other Member States, and to the Commission. Where within one month after the notification, the non-compliance of the type-approval is confirmed by the approval authority that granted the EU type-approval, that approval authority shall withdraw the type-approval.
3.   Where, within one month after the notification referred to in paragraph 2, an objection has been raised by the approval authority that granted the EU type-approval, the Commission shall consult the Member States without delay, in particular the approval authority that granted the type-approval and the relevant economic operator.
4.   On the basis of the consultation referred to in paragraph 3 of this Article, the Commission shall adopt implementing acts to decide if the refusal of recognition of EU type-approval referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article is justified. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 83(2).
The Commission shall immediately communicate the decision referred to in the first subparagraph to the relevant economic operators. The Member States shall implement such acts without delay and shall inform the Commission accordingly.
5.   Where, following tests and inspections carried out by the Commission in accordance with Article 9, the Commission establishes that a type-approval that has been granted is not compliant with this Regulation, it shall consult the Member States without delay, in particular the approval authority that granted the type-approval and the relevant economic operator.
On the basis of consultations referred to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph the Commission shall adopt an implementing act to decide on the refusal of the recognition of type-approval referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 83(2).
6.   Articles 51, 52 and 53 apply to vehicles, systems, components and separate technical units that are the subject of a non-compliant type-approval and that are already made available on the market.
