Article 14
Obligations of manufacturers concerning their vehicles, systems, components, separate technical units, parts and equipment that are not in conformity or that present a serious risk
1.   Where a vehicle, system, component, separate technical unit, part or equipment that has been placed on the market or that has entered into service is not in conformity with this Regulation or where the type-approval has been granted on the basis of incorrect data, the manufacturer shall immediately take the corrective measures necessary to bring that vehicle, system, component, separate technical unit, part or equipment into conformity, to withdraw it from the market or to recall it, as appropriate.
The manufacturer shall immediately inform the approval authority that granted the type-approval in detail of the non-conformity and of any measures taken.
2.   Where the vehicle, system, component, separate technical unit, part or equipment presents a serious risk, the manufacturer shall immediately provide to the approval authorities and market surveillance authorities detailed information on the risk and on any measures taken in relation thereto.
3.   Manufacturers shall keep the EU type-approval certificates and their attachments referred to in Article 28(1) for a period of 10 years after the end of validity of the EU type-approval of a vehicle and for a period of five years after the end of validity of the EU type-approval of a system, component or separate technical unit.
Manufacturers of a vehicle shall keep at the disposal of the approval authorities for a period of 10 years from the date of manufacture of the vehicle a copy of the certificates of conformity referred to in Article 36.
4.   Manufacturers shall, following a reasoned request from a national authority or the Commission, provide that authority or the Commission, with a copy of the EU type-approval certificate, or the authorisation referred to in Article 55(1) demonstrating conformity of the vehicle, system, component, separate technical unit, part or equipment, in a language that can be easily understood by the national authority or the Commission.
Manufacturers shall, following a reasoned request from a national authority, cooperate with that authority on any action taken in accordance with Article 20 of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 to eliminate the risks posed by the vehicle, system, component, separate technical unit, part or equipment that they have made available on the market.
