Article 7
Cooperation mechanism in relation to foreign direct investments not undergoing screening
1.   Where a Member State considers that a foreign direct investment planned or completed in another Member State which is not undergoing screening in that Member State is likely to affect its security or public order, or has relevant information in relation to that foreign direct investment, it may provide comments to that other Member State. The Member State providing comments shall send those comments to the Commission simultaneously.
The Commission shall notify the other Member States that comments were provided.
2.   Where the Commission considers that a foreign direct investment planned or completed in a Member State which is not undergoing screening in that Member State is likely to affect security or public order in more than one Member State, or has relevant information in relation to that foreign direct investment, it may issue an opinion addressed to the Member State in which the foreign direct investment is planned or has been completed. The Commission may issue an opinion irrespective of whether other Member States have provided comments. The Commission may issue an opinion following comments from other Member States. The Commission shall issue such opinion where justified, after at least one third of Member States consider that a foreign direct investment is likely to affect their security or public order.
The Commission shall notify the other Member States that an opinion was issued.
3.   A Member State which duly considers that a foreign direct investment in its territory is likely to affect its security or public order may request the Commission to issue an opinion, or other Member States to provide comments.
4.   The comments referred to in paragraph 1 and the opinions referred to in paragraph 2 shall be duly justified.
5.   Where a Member State or the Commission considers that a foreign direct investment which is not undergoing screening is likely to affect security or public order as referred to in paragraph 1 or 2, it may request from the Member State where the foreign direct investment is planned or has been completed the information referred to in Article 9.
Any request for information shall be duly justified, limited to information necessary to provide comments pursuant to paragraph 1, or to issue an opinion pursuant to paragraph 2, proportionate to the purpose of the request and not unduly burdensome for the Member State where the foreign direct investment is planned or has been completed.
Requests for information and replies provided by Member States shall be sent to the Commission simultaneously.
6.   Comments pursuant to paragraph 1 or opinions pursuant to paragraph 2 shall be addressed to the Member State where the foreign direct investment is planned or has been completed and shall be sent to it within a reasonable period of time, and in any case no later than 35 calendar days following receipt of the information referred to in paragraph 5 or of the notification pursuant to Article 9(5). In cases where the opinion of the Commission follows comments from other Member States, the Commission shall have 15 additional calendar days for issuing that opinion.
7.   A Member State where a foreign direct investment is planned or has been completed shall give due consideration to the comments of the other Member States and to the opinion of the Commission.
8.   Member States may provide comments pursuant to paragraph 1 and the Commission may provide an opinion pursuant to paragraph 2 no later than 15 months after the foreign direct investment has been completed.
9.   Cooperation pursuant to this Article shall take place through the contact points established in accordance with Article 11.
10.   This Article shall not apply to foreign direct investments completed before 10 April 2019.
