Article 10
Monitoring and data collection
1.   Member States shall take the appropriate measures to ensure that effective data collection tools are in place to monitor minimum wage protection.
2.   Member States shall report the following data and information to the Commission every second year, before 1 October of the reporting year:
(a)
the rate and development of collective bargaining coverage;
(b)
for statutory minimum wages:
(i)
the level of the statutory minimum wage and the share of workers covered by it;
(ii)
a description of the existing variations and deductions and the reasons for their introduction and the share of workers covered by variations, as far as data is available;
(c)
for minimum wage protection provided for only in collective agreements:
(i)
the lowest pay rates provided for in collective agreements covering low-wage earners or an estimate thereof, if accurate data is not available to the responsible national authorities, and the share of workers covered by them or an estimate thereof, if accurate data is not available to the responsible national authorities;
(ii)
the level of wages paid to workers not covered by collective agreements and its relation to the level of wages paid to workers covered by collective agreements.
The Member States that are subject to the reporting obligations referred to in first subparagraph, point (c) shall be required to report the data referred to in point (i) thereof at least with regard to sectoral, geographical and other multi-employer collective agreements, including collective agreements that have been declared universally applicable.
Member States shall provide the statistics and information referred to in this paragraph disaggregated by gender, age, disability, company size and sector as far as available.
The first report shall cover 2021, 2022 and 2023 and shall be delivered by 1 October 2025. The Member States may omit statistics and information which are not available before 15 November 2024.
3.   The Commission shall analyse the data and information transmitted by the Member States in the reports referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article and in the action plans referred to in Article 4(2). It shall report in this regard every second year to the European Parliament and to the Council and shall simultaneously publish the data and information transmitted by Member States.
