Whereas:
(1) Directive 96/82/EC(4) aims at the prevention of major accidents which involve dangerous substances and the limitation of their consequences for man and the environment, with a view to ensuring high levels of protection throughout the Community in a consistent and effective manner.
(2) In the light of recent industrial accidents and studies on carcinogens and substances dangerous for the environment carried out by the Commission at the Council's request, the scope of Directive 96/82/EC should be extended.
(3) The cyanide spill that polluted the Danube following the accident at Baia Mare in Romania in January 2000 has demonstrated that certain storage and processing activities in mining, especially tailings disposal facilities, including tailing ponds or dams, have potential to produce very serious consequences. The Commission communications on the safe operation of mining activities and on the sixth environment action programme of the European Community have therefore highlighted the need for an extension of the scope of Directive 96/82/EC. In its resolution of 5 July 2001(5) on the Commission Communication on the safe operation of mining activities, the European Parliament also welcomed the extension of the scope of that Directive to cover risks arising from storage and processing activities in mining.
(4) The proposal for a directive on the management of waste from the extractive industries may be a relevant framework for measures relating to those waste management facilities which present an accident risk but which are not covered by the present Directive.
(5) The "fireworks accident" at Enschede in the Netherlands in May 2000 has demonstrated the major accident potential arising from storage and manufacture of pyrotechnic and explosive substances. The definition of such substances in Directive 96/82/EC should therefore be clarified and simplified.
(6) The explosion at a fertiliser plant in Toulouse in September 2001 has raised awareness of the accident potential arising from the storage of ammonium nitrate and ammonium nitrate-based fertilisers, in particular of material rejected during the manufacturing process or returned to the manufacturer (off-specs). The existing categories of ammonium nitrate and ammonium nitrate-based fertilisers in Directive 96/82/EC should therefore be reviewed with a view to include "off-specs" material.
(7) Directive 96/82/EC should not be applied to sites of end-users where ammonium nitrate and ammonium nitrate-based fertilisers, which on delivery conformed to the specification in that Directive but subsequently have become degraded or contaminated, are temporarily present prior to removal for reprocessing or destruction.
(8) Studies carried out by the Commission in close cooperation with the Member States support extending the list of carcinogens with appropriate qualifying quantities and significantly lowering the qualifying quantities assigned to substances dangerous for the environment in Directive 96/82/EC.
(9) For establishments which subsequently fall within the scope of Directive 96/82/EC, it has been shown necessary to introduce minimum periods for notifications and the establishment of major accident prevention policies, safety reports and emergency plans.
(10) The experience and knowledge of relevant staff in the establishment can greatly assist in the drawing up of emergency plans, and all staff in an establishment and persons likely to be affected should be appropriately informed on safety measures and actions.
(11) The adoption of Council Decision 2001/792/EC, Euratom of 23 October 2001 establishing a Community mechanism to facilitate reinforced cooperation in civil protection assistance interventions(6) highlights the need to facilitate reinforced cooperation in civil protection assistance interventions.
(12) It is useful, in order to facilitate land-use planning, to draw up guidelines defining a database to be used for assessing the compatibility between the establishments covered by Directive 96/82/EC and the areas described in Article 12(1) of that Directive.
(13) There should be an obligation on Member States to supply the Commission with minimum information concerning the establishments covered by Directive 96/82/EC.
(14) It is appropriate at the same time to clarify certain passages in Directive 96/82/EC.
(15) The measures provided for in this Directive have been the subject of a public consultation process involving interested parties.
(16) Directive 96/82/EC should therefore be amended accordingly,
HAVE ADOPTED THIS DIRECTIVE:

