Article 15
European approval for materials
1.   European approval for materials shall be issued at the request of one or more manufacturers of materials or equipment, by one of the notified bodies referred to in Article 20 specifically designated for that task. The notified body shall determine and perform, or arrange for the performance of, the appropriate inspections and tests to certify the conformity of the types of material with the corresponding requirements of this Directive. In the case of materials recognised as being safe to use before 29 November 1999, the notified body shall take account of the existing data when certifying such conformity.
2.   Before issuing a European approval for materials, the notified body shall notify the Member States and the Commission by sending them the appropriate information. Within three months, a Member State or the Commission may provide comments giving its reasons. The notified body may issue the European approval for materials taking into account the comments submitted.
3.   A copy of the European approval for materials shall be sent to the Member States, the notified bodies and the Commission.
4.   When the European approval for materials satisfies the requirements which it covers and which are set out in Annex I, the Commission shall publish the references of that approval. The Commission shall keep up to date a list of such approvals in the Official Journal of the European Union.
5.   The notified body which issued the European approval for materials shall withdraw that approval if it finds that it should not have been issued or if the type of materials is covered by a harmonised standard. It shall immediately inform the other Member States, the notified bodies and the Commission of any withdrawal of an approval.
6.   When a Member State or the Commission considers that a European approval for materials whose references have been published in the Official Journal of the European Union, does not entirely satisfy the essential safety requirements which it covers and which are set out in Annex I, the Commission shall decide by means of implementing acts whether to withdraw the references of that European approval for materials from the Official Journal of the European Union.
The implementing acts referred to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 44(3).
