Article 25
Requirements relating to user inspectorates
1.   For the purposes of notification, a user inspectorate shall meet the requirements laid down in paragraphs 2 to 11.
2.   A user inspectorate shall be established under national law of a Member State and have legal personality.
3.   A user inspectorate shall be organisationally identifiable and have reporting methods within the group of which it is part which ensure and demonstrate its impartiality.
4.   A user inspectorate, its top level management and the personnel responsible for carrying out the conformity assessment tasks shall not be the designer, manufacturer, supplier, installer, purchaser, owner, user or maintainer of the pressure equipment or assembly which they assess, nor the authorised representative of any of those parties. This shall not preclude the use of assessed pressure equipment or assemblies that are necessary for the operations of the user inspectorate or the use of such equipment for personal purposes.
A user inspectorate, its top level management and the personnel responsible for carrying out the conformity assessment tasks shall not be directly involved in the design, manufacture or construction, the marketing, installation, use or maintenance of that pressure equipment or assembly, or represent the parties engaged in those activities. They shall not engage in any activity that may conflict with their independence of judgement or integrity in relation to conformity assessment activities for which they are notified. This shall in particular apply to consultancy services.
5.   User inspectorates and their personnel shall carry out the conformity assessment activities with the highest degree of professional integrity and the requisite technical competence in the specific field and shall be free from all pressures and inducements, particularly financial, which might influence their judgement or the results of their conformity assessment activities, especially as regards persons or groups of persons with an interest in the results of those activities.
6.   A user inspectorate shall be capable of carrying out all the conformity assessment tasks assigned to it by Article 16 and in relation to which it has been notified, whether those tasks are carried out by the user inspectorate itself or on its behalf and under its responsibility.
At all times and for each conformity assessment procedure and each kind or category of pressure equipment in relation to which it has been notified, the user inspectorate shall have at its disposal the necessary:
(a)
personnel with technical knowledge and sufficient and appropriate experience to perform the conformity assessment tasks;
(b)
descriptions of procedures in accordance with which conformity assessment is carried out, ensuring the transparency and the ability of reproduction of those procedures. It shall have appropriate policies and procedures in place that distinguish between tasks it carries out as a user inspectorate and other activities;
(c)
procedures for the performance of activities which take due account of the size of an undertaking, the sector in which it operates, its structure, the degree of complexity of the product technology in question and the mass or serial nature of the production process.
A user inspectorate shall have the means necessary to perform the technical and administrative tasks connected with the conformity assessment activities in an appropriate manner and shall have access to all necessary equipment or facilities.
7.   The personnel responsible for carrying out conformity assessment tasks shall have the following:
(a)
sound technical and vocational training covering all the conformity assessment activities in relation to which the conformity assessment body has been notified;
(b)
satisfactory knowledge of the requirements of the assessments they carry out and adequate authority to carry out those assessments;
(c)
appropriate knowledge and understanding of the essential safety requirements set out in Annex I, of the applicable harmonised standards and of the relevant provisions of Union harmonisation legislation and of national legislation;
(d)
the ability to draw up certificates, records and reports demonstrating that assessments have been carried out.
8.   The impartiality of the user inspectorates, their top level management and of the personnel responsible for carrying out conformity assessment tasks shall be guaranteed. User inspectorates must not engage in any activities that might conflict with its independence of judgement and integrity in relation to its inspection activities.
The remuneration of the top level management and personnel responsible for carrying out conformity assessment tasks of a user inspectorate shall not depend on the number of assessments carried out or on the results of those assessments.
9.   User inspectorates shall take out liability insurance unless liability is assumed by the group of which they are part.
10.   The personnel of user inspectorates shall observe professional secrecy with regard to all information obtained in carrying out their tasks under Article 16 or any provision of national law giving effect to them, except in relation to the competent authorities of the Member State in which its activities are carried out. Proprietary rights shall be protected.
11.   User inspectorates shall participate in, or ensure that their personnel responsible for carrying out conformity assessment tasks are informed of, the relevant standardisation activities and the activities of the notified body coordination group established under the relevant Union harmonisation legislation and shall apply as general guidance the administrative decisions and documents produced as a result of the work of that group.
