Article 6
Obligations of manufacturers
1.   When placing their pressure equipment or assemblies referred to in Article 4(1) and (2) on the market or using them for their own purposes, manufacturers shall ensure that they have been designed and manufactured in accordance with the essential safety requirements set out in Annex I.
When placing their pressure equipment or assemblies referred to in Article 4(3) on the market or using them for their own purposes, manufacturers shall ensure that they have been designed and manufactured in accordance with the sound engineering practice of a Member State.
2.   For the pressure equipment or assemblies referred to in Article 4(1) and (2), manufacturers shall draw up the technical documentation referred to in Annex III and carry out the relevant conformity assessment procedure referred to in Article 14 or have it carried out.
Where compliance of the pressure equipment or assemblies referred to in Article 4(1) and (2) with the applicable requirements has been demonstrated by the procedure referred to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph, manufacturers shall draw up an EU declaration of conformity and affix the CE marking.
3.   Manufacturers shall keep the technical documentation and the EU declaration of conformity for 10 years after pressure equipment or assemblies have been placed on the market.
4.   Manufacturers shall ensure that procedures are in place for series production to remain in conformity with this Directive. Changes in design or characteristics of pressure equipment or assemblies and changes in the harmonised standards or in other technical specifications by reference to which conformity of pressure equipment or assemblies is declared shall be adequately taken into account.
When deemed appropriate with regard to the risks presented by pressure equipment or assemblies, manufacturers shall, to protect the health and safety of consumers and other users, carry out sample testing of pressure equipment or assemblies made available on the market, investigate, and, if necessary, keep a register of complaints of non-conforming pressure equipment and assemblies and recalls of such equipment, and shall keep distributors informed of any such monitoring.
5.   Manufacturers shall ensure that their pressure equipment or assemblies bear a type, batch or serial number or other element allowing their identification, or, where the size or nature of the equipment or assembly does not allow it, that the required information is provided on the packaging or in a document accompanying the equipment.
6.   Manufacturers shall indicate on the pressure equipment or assembly their name, registered trade name or registered trade mark and the postal address at which they can be contacted or, where that is not possible, on the packaging or in a document accompanying the equipment or assembly. The address shall indicate a single point at which the manufacturer can be contacted. The contact details shall be in a language easily understood by consumers, other users and market surveillance authorities.
7.   Manufacturers shall ensure that the pressure equipment or assemblies referred to in Article 4(1) and (2) is accompanied by instructions and safety information in accordance with points 3.3 and 3.4 of Annex I, in a language which can be easily understood by consumers and other users, as determined by the Member State concerned. Such instructions and safety information shall be clear, understandable and intelligible.
Manufacturers shall ensure that the pressure equipment or assemblies referred to in Article 4(3) are accompanied by instructions and safety information in accordance with Article 4(3), in a language which can be easily understood by consumers and other users, as determined by the Member State concerned. Such instructions and safety information shall be clear, understandable and intelligible.
8.   Manufacturers who consider or have reason to believe that pressure equipment or assemblies which they have placed on the market are not in conformity with this Directive shall immediately take the corrective measures necessary to bring that pressure equipment or those assemblies into conformity, to withdraw it or recall it, if appropriate. Furthermore, where pressure equipment or assemblies present a risk, manufacturers shall immediately inform the competent national authorities of the Member States in which they made that pressure equipment or those assemblies available on the market to that effect, giving details, in particular, of the non-compliance and of any corrective measures taken.
9.   Manufacturers shall, further to a reasoned request from a competent national authority, provide it with all the information and documentation necessary to demonstrate the conformity of the pressure equipment or assembly with this Directive, in a language which can be easily understood by that authority. That information and documentation may be provided in paper or electronic form. They shall cooperate with that authority, at its request, on any action taken to eliminate the risks posed by the pressure equipment or assembly which they have placed on the market.
