Article 6
Staging and equivalences between categories
1.   The issue of driving licences shall be subject to the following conditions:
(a)
licences for categories C1, C, D1 and D shall be issued only to drivers already entitled to drive vehicles in category B;
(b)
licences for categories BE, C1E, CE, D1E and DE shall be issued only to drivers already entitled to drive vehicles in categories B, C1, C, D1 and D respectively.
2.   The validity of driving licences shall be determined as follows:
(a)
licences granted for categories C1E, CE, D1E or DE shall be valid for combinations of vehicles in category BE;
(b)
licences granted for category CE shall be valid for category DE as long as their holders are entitled to drive vehicles in category D;
(c)
licences granted for category CE and DE shall be valid for combinations of vehicles in categories C1E and D1E respectively;
(d)
licences granted for any category shall be valid for vehicles in category AM. However, for driving licences issued on its territory, a Member State may limit the equivalences for category AM to categories A1, A2 and A, if that Member State imposes a practical test as a condition for obtaining category AM;
(e)
licences issued for category A2 shall also be valid for category A1;
(f)
licences granted for categories A, B, C or D shall be valid for categories A1, A2, B1, C1, or D1 respectively.
3.   For driving on their territory, Member States may grant the following equivalences:
(a)
motor tricycles under a licence for category B, for motor tricycles with a power exceeding 15 kW provided that the holder of the licence for category B is at least 21 years old;
(b)
category A1 motorcycles under a licence for category B.
As this paragraph is only valid on their territories, Member States shall not indicate on the driving licence that a holder is entitled to drive these vehicles.
4.   Member States may, after consulting the Commission, authorise the driving on their territory of:
(a)
vehicles of category D1 (with a maximum authorised mass of 3 500 kg, excluding any specialised equipment intended for the carriage of disabled passengers) by holders over 21 years old of a driving licence for category B which was obtained at least two years earlier provided that the vehicles are being used by non-commercial bodies for social purposes and that the driver provides his services on a voluntary basis;
(b)
vehicles of a maximum authorised mass exceeding 3 500 kg by holders over 21 years old of a driving licence for category B which was obtained at least two years before, provided that the main purpose of the vehicles is to be used only when stationary as an instructional or recreational area, and that they are being used by non-commercial bodies for social purposes and that vehicles have been modified so that they may not be used either for the transport of more than nine persons or for the transport of any goods other than those strictly necessary for their purposes.
