Article 29
Complementarity of Union action
1.   The Programme actions shall be consistent with and complementary to the relevant policies, instruments and programmes at Union level, in particular the Erasmus+ Programme, as well as to existing networks at Union level relevant to the activities of the Programme.
2.   The Programme actions shall also be consistent with and complementary to the relevant policies, programmes and instruments at national level in the Member States and third countries associated to the Programme. To that end, the Commission, national authorities and national agencies shall exchange information on existing national schemes and priorities related to solidarity and youth, on the one hand, and actions under the Programme, on the other hand, with a view to building on relevant good practices and achieving efficiency and effectiveness.
3.   Volunteering as set out in Article 10 shall, in particular, be consistent with and complementary to other areas of Union external action, in particular humanitarian aid policy, development cooperation policy, enlargement policy, neighbourhood policy and the Union Civil Protection Mechanism.
4.   An action that has received a contribution under the Programme may also receive a contribution from another Union programme, provided that the contributions do not cover the same costs. The rules of the relevant Union programme shall apply to the corresponding contribution to the action. The cumulative financing shall not exceed the total eligible costs of the action. The support from the different Union programmes may be calculated on a pro-rata basis in accordance with the documents setting out the conditions for support.
5.   Project proposals may receive support from the European Regional Development Fund or the European Social Fund Plus, in accordance with Article 73(4) of the Common Provisions Regulation for 2021-2027, where they have been awarded a Seal of Excellence label under the Programme by virtue of complying with the following cumulative conditions:
(a)
they have been assessed in a call for proposals under the Programme;
(b)
they comply with the minimum quality requirements of that call for proposals; and
(c)
they cannot be financed under that call for proposals due to budgetary constraints.

CHAPTER XII



Transitional and final provisions


