Article 17
Participating organisations
1.   The Programme shall be open to the participation of public or private entities, whether non-profit or profit-making, and international organisations, provided that they have received a quality label.
2.   The competent Programme implementing body shall assess an application from an entity to become a participating organisation based on the principles of:
(a)
equal treatment;
(b)
equal opportunities and non-discrimination;
(c)
the avoidance of job substitution;
(d)
the avoidance of harmful activities;
(e)
the provision of high quality, easily accessible and inclusive activities with a learning dimension focusing on personal, socio-educational and professional development;
(f)
adequate volunteering arrangements;
(g)
safe and decent environments and conditions, with internal mechanisms for conflict resolution to protect the participant; and
(h)
‘no-profit’ in accordance with the Financial Regulation.
The competent Programme implementing body shall use the principles referred to in the first subparagraph to ascertain whether the activities of the entity applying to become a participating organisation meet the requirements and objectives of the Programme.
3.   As a result of the assessment referred to in paragraph 2, the entity may be attributed a quality label. The competent Programme implementing body shall periodically reassess whether the entity continues to comply with the conditions that led to the attribution of the quality label. Where the entity no longer complies with those conditions, the competent Programme implementing body shall take remedial measures until such time as the conditions and quality requirements are met. In the event of continued failure to comply with those conditions and quality requirements, the quality label shall be revoked.
4.   Any entity which has received a quality label shall be given access to the European Solidarity Corps Portal in a host capacity, in a support capacity, or in both capacities, and shall be able to make offers of solidarity activities to registered candidates.
5.   The quality label shall not automatically lead to funding under the Programme.
6.   The solidarity activities and related quality and support measures offered by a participating organisation may receive funding under the Programme or from other funding sources which do not depend on the Union budget.
7.   For participating organisations under the European Voluntary Humanitarian Aid Corps, the safety and security of volunteers, based on risk assessments, shall be a priority.
8.   After completion of the solidarity activity and if requested by the participant, a participating organisation shall provide the participant with a certification stating the learning outcomes of, and skills developed during, the solidarity activity, such as Youthpass or Europass.
