Article 25
European Commission
1.   The rules applying to the relationship between the Commission and a national agency shall be laid down, in accordance with Article 27 of Regulation (EU) 2021/817, in a written document which shall:
(a)
set out the internal control standards for the national agency concerned and the rules for the management of the Union funds for grant support by the national agencies;
(b)
include the national agency work programme comprising the management tasks of the national agency to which Union support is provided; and
(c)
specify the reporting requirements for the national agency.
2.   Each year, the Commission shall make the following funds available to the national agency:
(a)
funds for grant support in the Member State or third country associated to the Programme concerned for Programme actions the management of which is entrusted to the national agency;
(b)
a financial contribution in support of the national agency’s management tasks, which shall be established in accordance with the arrangements set out in point (b) of Article 28(3) of Regulation (EU) 2021/817.
3.   The Commission shall lay down the requirements for the national agency’s work programme. The Commission shall not make Programme funds available to the national agency before having formally approved the national agency’s work programme.
4.   On the basis of the compliance requirements for national agencies referred to in Article 26(3) of Regulation (EU) 2021/817, the Commission shall review the national management and control systems, the national agency’s yearly management declaration and the opinion of the independent audit body thereon, taking due account of the information provided by the national authority on its monitoring and supervision activities with regard to the Programme.
5.   After assessing the yearly management declaration and the opinion of the independent audit body thereon, the Commission shall address its opinion and observations to the national agency and the national authority.
6.   In the event that the Commission cannot accept the yearly management declaration or the independent audit opinion thereon, or in the event of unsatisfactory implementation by the national agency of the Commission’s observations, the Commission may implement any precautionary and corrective measures necessary to safeguard the Union’s financial interests in accordance with point (c) of the first subparagraph of Article 131(3) of the Financial Regulation.
