Article 35
Corrective and restrictive measures at Union level
1.   The national authority taking either a corrective or a restrictive measure in accordance with Article 34 shall notify the Commission and the national authorities of other Member States without delay, by means of the information and communication system referred to in Article 34(1) of Regulation (EU) 2019/1020.
It shall also inform without delay the approval authority that granted the approval about its findings. In the cases of non-road mobile machinery that presents a serious risk those corrective or restrictive measures shall also be notified via the Safety Gate Rapid Alert System referred to in Article 25 of Regulation (EU) 2023/988 of the European Parliament and of the Council (15).
The information provided in accordance with the first and second subparagraphs shall include all available details, including the data necessary for the identification of the concerned non-road mobile machinery, its origin, the nature of the alleged non-compliance or the risk involved, the nature and duration of the national measures taken, and the arguments put forward, when those arguments are put forward, by the relevant economic operator.
2.   The Member State that takes the measure shall indicate whether the risk or the non-compliance is due to the following:
(a)
the failure of the non-road mobile machinery to comply with this Regulation; or
(b)
shortcomings in the relevant regulatory acts adopted pursuant to this Regulation.
3.   Member States other than the Member State that takes the measure shall inform, within 1 month of the notification referred to in paragraph 1, the Commission and the other Member States of any measures they have adopted and of any information at their disposal relating to the non-compliance or the risk of the non-road mobile machinery concerned, as well as, in the event of disagreement with the notified national measure, of their objections.
4.   Where, within 3 months of the notification referred to in paragraph 1, no objection has been raised by either another Member State or the Commission in respect of a notified national measure, the other Member States shall ensure that similar measures are taken without delay within their territories in respect of the non-road mobile machinery concerned.
5.   Where, within 3 months of the notification referred to in paragraph 1, another Member State or the Commission raises an objection in respect of a notified national measure, or where the Commission considers that a notified national measure is contrary to Union law, the Commission shall consult the Member States concerned and the relevant economic operator or operators without delay.
6.   On the basis of the consultation referred to in paragraph 5, the Commission shall adopt implementing acts to decide on harmonised measures at Union level. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 49(2).
7.   The Commission shall immediately communicate the decision referred to in paragraph 6 to the relevant economic operator or operators. Member States shall enforce measures contained in the acts referred to in paragraph 6 without delay and shall inform the Commission accordingly.
8.   Where the Commission considers that a notified national measure is unjustified or contrary to Union law, the Member State concerned shall withdraw or adapt the measure, in accordance with the Commission decision referred to in paragraph 6.
9.   Where the risk or non-compliance is attributed to shortcomings in regulatory acts adopted pursuant to this Regulation, the Commission shall propose the necessary amendments to the acts concerned.
10.   Where a corrective measure is considered to be justified in accordance with this Article or is subject to the implementing acts referred to in paragraph 6, that measure shall be available free of charge to the owners of the affected non-road mobile machinery. Where repairs have been carried out at the registration holder’s expense before the adoption of the corrective measure, the manufacturer shall reimburse the cost of such repairs up to the cost of the repairs required by that corrective measure.
