Article 21
EU type-approval certificate
1.   When an EU type-approval is granted, an EU type-approval certificate shall be issued by the approval authority to the manufacturer or its representative for EU type-approval.
The EU type-approval certificate shall remain valid as long as the EU type-approval is valid.
The EU type-approval certificate shall be amended by the approval authority when the relevant EU type-approval is amended.
2.   The EU type-approval certificate shall contain the following attachments:
(a)
the information package referred to in Article 20(4);
(b)
the test results sheet;
(c)
the name and specimen of the signature of the person authorised to sign a certificate of conformity and a statement of that person’s position in the company;
(d)
a filled-out specimen of the certificate of conformity.
3.   The Commission shall adopt implementing acts laying down a harmonised numbering system. EU type-approval certificates shall be numbered in accordance with that harmonised numbering system. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 49(2). The approval authority shall, within 1 month of issuing the EU type-approval certificate, send a copy of the EU type-approval certificate for non-road mobile machinery to the approval authorities of the other Member States, together with the attachments, by means of a common secure electronic exchange system.
4.   The Commission shall adopt implementing acts laying down the template for the EU type-approval certificate. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 49(2). In respect of each type of non-road mobile machinery, the approval authority shall:
(a)
complete all the relevant sections of the EU type-approval certificate, including the test results sheet attached thereto;
(b)
compile the index to the information package;
(c)
issue the completed certificate, together with its attachments, to the manufacturer or its representative for EU type-approval, without delay.
5.   The Commission shall adopt implementing acts laying down the template for the test results sheet referred to in paragraph 2, point (b). Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 49(2).
6.   In the case of an EU type-approval for which, in accordance with Article 30, restrictions have been imposed as to its validity, the EU type-approval certificate shall specify those restrictions.
7.   The approval authority shall establish a list of applicable requirements or acts and attach that list to the EU type-approval certificate. The Commission shall adopt implementing acts laying down the template for such a list. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 49(2).
