Article 23
Conformity of production arrangements
1.   An approval authority which grants an EU type-approval shall take the necessary measures to verify, directly, in cooperation with, or on the basis of the verification already carried out by the approval authority of another Member State, that adequate production arrangements have been made to ensure that the non-road mobile machinery in production conforms to the approved type and documented control plans, to be agreed with the holder of EU type-approval for each approval.
2.   The approval authority shall verify that the holder of EU type-approval has issued a sufficient number of samples of certificates of conformity in accordance with Article 28 and that the holder of EU type-approval has made adequate arrangements to ensure that the data in the certificates of conformity are correct.
3.   An approval authority which has granted an EU type-approval shall take the necessary measures in relation to that approval to verify, directly, in cooperation with, or on the basis of the verification already carried out by the approval authority of another Member State, that the arrangements referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article continue to be adequate so that non-road mobile machinery in production will continue to conform to the approved type and that certificates of conformity continue to comply with Article 28.
4.   The approval authority which has granted the EU type-approval may carry out any of the checks or tests, required for the EU type-approval, on samples taken at the premises of the holder of EU type-approval, including production facilities.
5.   When an approval authority which has granted an EU type-approval establishes that the arrangements referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 have not been made, deviate significantly from the arrangements and control plans agreed or are no longer considered to be adequate, even though production has continued, it shall either take the necessary measures to ensure that the procedure for conformity of production is followed correctly or withdraw the EU type-approval. The approval authority may decide to take all necessary corrective or restrictive measures laid down in Chapter X.
6.   The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 50 concerning the detailed arrangements with regard to conformity of production, such as the detailed conditions under which approval authorities may not refuse the verification already carried out by the approval authority of another Member State.
