Article 8
Specific obligations of manufacturers
1.   Manufacturers who have sufficient reason to believe that EU type-approved or EU individually approved non-road mobile machinery which they have made available on the market is not in conformity with the requirements laid down in this Regulation shall immediately take the corrective measures necessary to bring that non-road mobile machinery into conformity, to withdraw it or to recall it, as appropriate, and notify the user of that non-conformity.
The manufacturer shall immediately inform the approval authority which granted the EU type-approval or the EU individual approval, giving details of the non-conformity and of any measures taken.
2.   Manufacturers who have sufficient reason to believe that the non-road mobile machinery which they have made available on the market presents a serious risk shall immediately inform the approval authorities and the market surveillance authorities of the Member States in which the non-road mobile machinery was made available on the market thereof, giving details of that risk and any corrective measures taken. Manufacturers shall immediately inform the users of that serious risk and any corrective measures taken via appropriate means.
3.   Manufacturers shall keep, at the disposal of the approval authorities and market surveillance authorities, the information package and a copy of the certificates of conformity, for a period of 10 years after the placing on the market of non-road mobile machinery.
4.   Following a reasoned request from a national authority, a manufacturer shall provide that authority, through the approval authority, with a copy of the EU type-approval certificate or the EU individual approval certificate translated into a language which can be easily understood by that authority.
Manufacturers shall cooperate with national authorities on any action taken in accordance with Article 19 of Regulation (EU) 2019/1020 to eliminate the risks posed by their non-road mobile machinery which has been placed on the market, registered or entered into service.
5.   Manufacturers shall examine any complaints they receive relating to risks, suspected incidents or non-compliance issues with the non-road mobile machinery that they have placed on the market.
In case of a substantiated complaint, manufacturers shall immediately inform their distributors and importers thereof.
Manufacturers shall keep a record of the complaints referred to in the first subparagraph, including a description of the issue and the details needed to identify the affected type of non-road mobile machinery.
