Article 5
Obligations of Member States
1.   Member States shall establish or appoint the authorities competent in matters concerning approval and market surveillance in accordance with this Regulation. Member States shall notify the Commission of the establishment and appointment of such authorities.
2.   Member States shall ensure that their approval authorities and market surveillance authorities have the necessary resources for the proper performance of their duties.
3.   The notification of the approval authorities and market surveillance authorities shall include their name, address, electronic address and areas of responsibility. The Commission shall publish on its website a list and details of the approval authorities and market surveillance authorities.
4.   Member States shall only permit the making available on the market, registration, entry into service or circulation on public roads of non-road mobile machinery that complies with this Regulation.
5.   Member States shall not, for the aspects covered by this Regulation, prohibit, restrict or impede the making available on the market, registration, entry into service or circulation on public roads of non-road mobile machinery that complies with this Regulation.
6.   By way of derogation from paragraph 5, Member States may limit or prohibit the circulation on public roads or the registration of non-road mobile machinery that has been approved in accordance with this Regulation which satisfies any of the following criteria:
(a)
due to its excessive dimensions, the machinery would not allow for sufficient manoeuvrability on public roads;
(b)
due to its excessive mass, axle loads or ground contact pressure, the machinery could damage the surface of public roads or other road infrastructure;
(c)
due to its fully automated, or remotely operated, driving system for on-road use, the machinery is subject to restrictions under national traffic law.
The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 50 to supplement this Regulation by establishing the methodology for the determination of the threshold values, to be established by means of the implementing acts referred to in the third subparagraph of this paragraph, as regards non-road mobile machinery’s maximum road laden mass on road, axle loads or ground contact pressure beyond which that non-road mobile machinery’s dimensions, weight and mass are considered to be excessive within the meaning of points (a) and (b) of the first subparagraph of this paragraph.
The Commission shall adopt implementing acts setting out those threshold values in accordance with that methodology. Those threshold values may differ in respect of the different groups of non-road mobile machinery concerned.
7.   Member States shall organise and carry out market surveillance activities and controls of non-road mobile machinery entering the market in accordance with Chapters IV, V and VII of Regulation (EU) 2019/1020.
8.   Member States shall take the necessary measures to ensure that market surveillance authorities are entitled, in accordance with national law, to exercise the powers conferred on them under Article 14 of Regulation (EU) 2019/1020.
