Article 16
Technical requirements for non-road mobile machinery intended to circulate on public roads
1.   Non-road mobile machinery shall be designed, constructed and assembled so as to minimise the risk of injury to the occupants and to other persons and the risk of damage to road infrastructure, in the machinery’s surrounding area, while that non-road mobile machinery is circulating on a public road.
2.   The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 50 concerning detailed rules on the requirements set out in paragraph 1 for the following elements:
(a)
vehicle structure integrity;
(b)
maximum design speed, speed governor, speed limitation devices and speedometers;
(c)
braking devices;
(d)
steering;
(e)
field of vision;
(f)
windscreen wipers;
(g)
glazing and its installation;
(h)
indirect vision devices;
(i)
lighting, installation of lighting and visual warnings and markings;
(j)
the exterior and accessories in on-road position, including working equipment and swinging structure;
(k)
audible warning devices and their installation;
(l)
heating systems, defrosting and demisting systems;
(m)
registration plate spaces;
(n)
statutory plate with marking;
(o)
dimensions;
(p)
masses;
(q)
energy storage systems;
(r)
tyres;
(s)
reverse gear;
(t)
tracks;
(u)
mechanical couplings;
(v)
driver and other occupants’ seating positions and restraint systems;
(w)
additions to the operator’s manual specific for road use;
(x)
operator’s controls.
The delegated acts referred to in the first subparagraph may lay down detailed rules for any other element, where necessary, due to technical and scientific progress, and to ensure compliance with paragraph 1.
The delegated acts referred to in the first subparagraph shall also, where appropriate, include detailed rules on the following:
(a)
test procedures chosen from those listed in Article 22(3);
(b)
test methods;
(c)
limit values or parameters, in relation to any of the elements listed in the first subparagraph;
(d)
description of equipment or parts of equipment that non-road mobile machinery shall be equipped with;
(e)
specific characteristics of the non-road mobile machinery.
The delegated acts referred to in the first subparagraph may provide different detailed rules for different non-road mobile machinery groups and shall specify whether their provisions apply to non-road mobile machinery intended to circulate on public roads with a driver, without a driver, or both.
3.   When adopting the delegated acts referred to in paragraph 2, the Commission shall ensure that the requirements laid down in those delegated acts are aligned and consistent with, and complementary to requirements applicable to non-road mobile machinery pursuant to other acts of Union law, in particular Regulation (EU) 2023/1230. In the preparation of those delegated acts, the Commission shall carry out appropriate consultations, including with the relevant stakeholders.
