Article 7
General obligations of manufacturers
1.   Manufacturers shall ensure that the non-road mobile machinery they place on the market either belongs to a type that has been granted an EU type-approval and is designed and manufactured in accordance with that type or has been granted an EU individual approval.
2.   Manufacturers shall ensure that the EU type-approved non-road mobile machinery they place on the market bears the statutory plate with marking required by this Regulation and is accompanied by its certificate of conformity.
Manufacturers shall also ensure for the EU type-approved and the EU individually approved non-road mobile machinery they place on the market that the documents, information and instructions for the user have been drawn up as required by this Regulation.
3.   For the purposes of market surveillance, manufacturers established outside the Union shall appoint a single representative established within the Union, which may be the representative referred to in Article 18 or an additional representative. The manufacturer’s representative for market surveillance shall perform the tasks specified in the mandate provided for in Article 9.
4.   Manufacturers shall indicate their names, registered trade names or registered trade marks, and the postal and email addresses at which they can be contacted on the non-road mobile machinery that they place on the market or, where that is not possible, in a document accompanying that machinery. The address indicated by a manufacturer shall indicate a single point at which that manufacturer can be contacted. Contact details shall be in a language easily understood by users and market surveillance authorities.
5.   Manufacturers shall be responsible to the approval authority for all aspects of the approval process and for ensuring conformity of production, whether or not they are directly involved in all stages of the construction of non-road mobile machinery.
6.   Manufacturers shall ensure that procedures are in place in order for series production to remain in conformity with the approved type. Changes in the design or characteristics of non-road mobile machinery and changes in the requirements to which that machinery is declared to conform shall be taken into account in accordance with Chapter V.
7.   Manufacturers shall ensure that, while EU type-approved or EU individually approved non-road mobile machinery is under their responsibility and is intended to be made available on the market, storage or transport conditions do not jeopardise its conformity with this Regulation.
8.   Manufacturers shall ensure that their non-road mobile machinery is not designed to incorporate strategies or other means that alter the performance exhibited during test procedures in such a way that it does not comply with this Regulation when operating under conditions that can reasonably be expected in normal operation.
