Article 13
Specific obligations of distributors
1.   Where distributors have sufficient reason to believe that non-road mobile machinery under their responsibility is not in conformity with this Regulation, they shall inform the manufacturer, the importer and the approval authority that granted the EU type-approval or the EU individual approval thereof, and shall not make that non-road mobile machinery available on the market until it has been brought into conformity.
2.   Distributors who have sufficient reason to believe that the non-road mobile machinery which they have made available on the market is not in conformity with this Regulation shall inform the manufacturer, the importer and the approval authority that granted the EU type-approval or the EU individual approval thereof.
3.   Distributors who have sufficient reason to believe that the non-road mobile machinery which they have made available on the market presents a serious risk, shall immediately inform the manufacturer, the importer and the approval authorities and market surveillance authorities of the Member States in which they made it available on the market.
The distributor shall also inform those authorities of any action taken and give details, in particular, of the serious risk and of corrective measures taken by the manufacturer.
4.   A distributor shall, following a reasoned request from a national authority, ensure that the manufacturer provides the national authority with the information specified in Article 8(4) or that the importer provides the national authority with the information specified in Article 11(4). The distributor shall cooperate with that authority, at its request, on any action taken in accordance with Article 19 of Regulation (EU) 2019/1020 to eliminate the risks posed by the non-road mobile machinery which it has made available on the market.
5.   Distributors shall immediately inform the relevant manufacturer of any complaints they received relating to risks, suspected incidents or non-conformity issues regarding non-road mobile machinery that they have made available on the market.
