Article 27
Termination of validity
1.   EU type-approvals shall be granted for an unlimited duration.
2.   An EU type-approval shall become invalid in each of the following cases:
(a)
where production of the EU type-approved non-road mobile machinery is definitively discontinued voluntarily;
(b)
where new requirements applicable to the EU type-approved non-road mobile machinery become mandatory for the making available on the market, registration, or entry into service of non-road mobile machinery, and it is not possible to update the type-approval in accordance with Chapter V;
(c)
where the validity of the EU type-approval expires by virtue of a restriction in accordance with Article 30(3);
(d)
where the EU type-approval has been withdrawn in accordance with Article 23(5).
However, in the case of the first subparagraph, point (b), the EU type-approval and the relevant EU type-approval certificate for placing non-road mobile machinery on the market shall become invalid 24 months after the date of application of the new requirements referred to in the first subparagraph, point (b).
3.   Where only one variant within a type or one version within a variant is affected, the EU type-approval of the non-road mobile machinery in question shall become invalid only in so far as the particular variant or version is concerned.
4.   Where the production of a particular type of non-road mobile machinery is discontinued definitively, the holder of the EU type-approval shall notify the approval authority that granted the EU type-approval for that non-road mobile machinery thereof.
5.   Within 1 month of receiving the notification referred to in paragraph 4, the approval authority that granted the EU type-approval for the non-road mobile machinery shall inform the approval authorities of the other Member States accordingly, by means of a common secure electronic exchange system.
6.   Without prejudice to paragraphs 4 and 5, in cases where an EU type-approval of non-road mobile machinery is due to become invalid, the holder of the EU type-approval shall notify the approval authority that granted the EU type-approval thereof.
The approval authority that granted the EU type-approval shall, without delay, communicate all relevant information to the approval authorities of the other Member States by means of a common secure electronic exchange system.
7.   The communication referred to in paragraph 6 shall specify, in particular, the date of production and the vehicle identification number of the last non-road mobile machinery produced.
