Article 11
Specific obligations of importers
1.   Importers shall not make available on the market non-road mobile machinery that is not in conformity with the requirements laid down in this Regulation, until such machinery has been brought into conformity.
2.   Importers who have sufficient reason to believe that the non-road mobile machinery which they have made available on the market is not in conformity with the requirements laid down in this Regulation shall immediately take the corrective measures necessary to bring that non-road mobile machinery into conformity, or to withdraw or recall it, as appropriate.
3.   Importers who have sufficient reason to believe that the non-road mobile machinery which they have made available on the market presents a serious risk shall immediately inform the manufacturer, the approval authorities and the market surveillance authorities of the Member States in which they have placed it on the market or entered it into service.
The importer shall also inform those authorities of any action taken and give details of the serious risk and any corrective measures taken by the manufacturer.
4.   Importers shall, for a period of 10 years after the placing on the market of the non-road mobile machinery, keep a copy of the certificate of conformity at the disposal of the approval authorities and the market surveillance authorities and shall ensure that the information package can be made available to those authorities at their request.
5.   An importer shall, following a reasoned request from a national authority, provide it with all the information and documentation necessary to demonstrate the conformity of non-road mobile machinery in a language which can be easily understood by that authority. The importer shall cooperate with that authority, at its request, on any action taken to eliminate the risks posed by the non-road mobile machinery which it has placed on the market.
6.   Importers shall keep a record of complaints and recalls relating to non-road mobile machinery that they have placed on the market, and shall keep their distributors informed of such complaints and recalls.
