Article 6
1. Community financing may cover studies, technical assistance, education, training or other services, supplies and works, small grant funds as well as appraisals, audits and evaluation and monitoring missions. It may cover, within the limit established annually by the budgetary authority, technical and administrative assistance costs, to the benefit of the Commission and the beneficiary, related to operations other than the permanent tasks of the public administration, linked to the identification, preparation, management, monitoring, auditing and control of programmes or projects.
Community financing may cover both investment, linked to a specific activity, with the exception of the purchase of real estate, and recurrent expenditure (including administrative, maintenance and operating expenditure).
With the exception of training, education and research programmes, recurrent expenditure may normally be covered only during the start-up phase and on a gradually decreasing basis.
2. A contribution from the cooperation partners defined in Article 5 shall be sought for each cooperation activity. Their contribution shall be requested according to their means and the nature of the activity concerned.
3. Opportunities may be sought for cofinancing with other donors, especially with Member States and the international organisations concerned. In this respect, coordination with the measures taken by other donors shall be sought.
4. The necessary measures shall be taken to emphasise the Community character of the assistance provided under this Regulation.
5. In order to attain the objectives of consistency and complementarity laid down in the Treaty and with the aim of guaranteeing optimum efficiency for all these activities, the Commission shall, in liaison with Member States, take all coordination measures necessary, including in particular:
(a) the systematic exchange and analysis of information on activities financed or being considered for financing by the Community and the Member States;
(b) on-the-spot coordination of these activities by means of regular meetings and of information between representatives of the Commission and of the Member States in the beneficiary countries.
6. In order to obtain the greatest possible impact of the activities at global, national and local levels, the Commission, in liaison with the Member States, shall take any initiative necessary for ensuring proper coordination and close collaboration, especially regarding the exchange of information, with the cooperation partners, donors and other international organisations involved, in particular those forming part of the United Nations system.

