Whereas:
(1)
According to Article 3(1) of the Treaty on European Union (TEU), among the aims of the Union is the promotion of the well-being of its peoples.
(2)
According to Articles 9 and 168 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU) and Article 35 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union, a high level of human health protection is to be ensured in the definition and implementation of all Union policies and activities.
(3)
Article 168 TFEU provides that the Union is to complement and support national health policies, encourage cooperation between Member States and promote the coordination between their programmes, in full respect of the responsibilities of Member States for the definition of their health policies and for the organisation, management and delivery of health services and medical care.
(4)
Actions have been taken in particular under the previous programmes of Union action in the field of public health, namely those provided for by Decisions No 1786/2002/EC (4) and No 1350/2007/EC (5) of the European Parliament and of the Council and by Regulation (EU) No 282/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council (6), to meet the requirements set out in Article 168 TFEU.
(5)
On 11 March 2020, the World Health Organization (WHO) declared the novel coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak a global pandemic. That pandemic has caused an unprecedented worldwide health crisis with severe socio-economic consequences and human suffering, which particularly affect people with chronic conditions. In addition, staff in health care settings, who have been essential during the COVID-19 crisis, have been exposed to great health risks.
(6)
While Member States are responsible for their health policies, they should protect public health in a spirit of European solidarity, as called for in the communication of the Commission of 13 March 2020 on coordinated economic response to the COVID-19 outbreak. Experience from the ongoing COVID-19 crisis has demonstrated that there is a need for further action at Union level to support cooperation and coordination among the Member States. That cooperation should improve preparedness for, and the prevention and control of, the spread of severe human infections and diseases across borders in order to combat other serious cross-border threats to health and to safeguard and improve the health and well-being of all people in the Union. Preparedness is the key to improving resilience to future threats. In that regard, Member States should be given the possibility of carrying out stress tests on a voluntary basis to improve preparedness and increase resilience.
(7)
It is therefore appropriate to establish a new and reinforced programme for Union action in the field of health, called the ‘EU4Health Programme’ (the ‘Programme’), for the period 2021-2027. In line with the goals of the Union’s action and the Union’s competences in the area of public health, the Programme should emphasise actions in relation to which there are advantages and efficiency gains from collaboration and cooperation at Union level, and actions that have an impact on the internal market.
(8)
The Programme should be a means of promoting actions in areas where there is a Union added value that can be demonstrated. Such actions should include, inter alia, strengthening the exchange of best practices between Member States, supporting networks for the sharing of knowledge or for mutual learning, addressing cross-border threats to health so as to reduce the risks of such threats and to mitigate their consequences, addressing certain issues relating to the internal market in relation to which the Union can achieve Union-wide high-quality solutions, thereby unlocking the potential of innovation in health, and improving efficiency by avoiding the duplication of activities and optimising the use of financial resources. The Programme should also support capacity-building actions to strengthen strategic planning, access to multisource financing and the capacity to invest in and implement actions of the Programme. In that respect, the Programme should provide country-specific tailor-made assistance to the Member States, or groups of Member States, with the greatest needs.
(9)
This Regulation lays down a financial envelope for the Programme which is to constitute the prime reference amount, within the meaning of point 18 of the Interinstitutional Agreement of 16 December 2020 between the European Parliament, the Council of the European Union and the European Commission on budgetary discipline, on cooperation in budgetary matters and on sound financial management, as well as on new own resources, including a roadmap towards the introduction of new own resources (7), for the European Parliament and the Council during the annual budgetary procedure. This financial envelope comprises an amount of EUR 500 000 000 in 2018 prices in line with the joint declaration by the European Parliament, Council and Commission on the reinforcement of specific programmes and adaptation of basic acts of 22 December 2020 (8).
(10)
In order for the Programme to be balanced and focused, minimum and maximum shares of the overall budget should be laid down in this Regulation, for certain areas of action, with a view to providing guidance for the allocation of resources in relation to the implementation of the Programme.
(11)
Due to the serious nature of cross-border threats to health, the Programme should support coordinated public health measures at Union level to address different aspects of such threats. With a view to strengthening the capability in the Union to prepare for, respond to and manage any future health crises, the Programme should provide support to actions taken in the framework of the mechanisms and structures established under Decision No 1082/2013/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council (9) and other relevant mechanisms and structures referred to in the communication of the Commission of 11 November 2020 entitled ‘Building a European Health Union: Reinforcing the EU’s resilience for cross-border health threats’, including actions directed at strengthening preparedness planning and response capacity at national and Union level, at reinforcing the role of the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) and the European Medicines Agency (EMA), and at establishing a health emergency preparedness and response authority. Such actions could include building capacity for responding to health crises, preventive measures related to vaccination and immunisation, strengthened surveillance programmes, provision of health information, and platforms to share best practices. In this context, the Programme should foster Union-wide and cross-sectoral crisis prevention, preparedness and surveillance, and the management capacity and response capacity of actors at Union and Member State levels, including contingency planning and preparedness exercises, in keeping with the ‘One Health’ and ‘Health in All Policies’ approaches. The Programme should facilitate the setting up of an integrated cross-cutting risk communication framework for all phases of a health crisis, namely prevention, preparedness and response.
(12)
With a view to strengthening capabilities in the Union to prevent, prepare for, respond to and manage health crises, the Programme should provide support to actions taken in the framework of the mechanisms and structures established under relevant Union legislation. That support could include capacity building in health crisis response, including contingency planning and preparedness, preventive measures such as those related to vaccination and immunisation, strengthened surveillance programmes and improved coordination and cooperation.
(13)
In the context of public health crises, clinical trials and health technology assessment (HTA) can contribute to speeding up the development and identification of effective medical countermeasures. It should therefore be possible for the Programme to provide support to facilitate actions in those fields.
(14)
With a view to protecting people in vulnerable situations, including those suffering from mental illness and those living with or most affected by communicable or non-communicable diseases and chronic diseases, the Programme should also promote actions which address and prevent the collateral impact of health crises on people belonging to such vulnerable groups and actions which improve mental health.
(15)
The COVID-19 crisis has highlighted many challenges, including the dependence of the Union on third countries in ensuring the supply of raw materials, active pharmaceutical ingredients, medicinal products, medical devices and personal protective equipment needed in the Union during health crises, in particular pandemics. The Programme should therefore provide support to actions that foster the production, procurement and management of crisis-relevant products within the Union to mitigate the risk of shortages, while ensuring complementarity with other Union instruments.
(16)
In order to minimise the public health consequences of serious cross-border threats to health, it should be possible for actions supported under the Programme to improve the interoperability of Member States’ health systems through cooperation and the exchange of best practices and also by increasing the number of joint actions. Those actions should ensure that Member States are able to respond to health emergencies, including by undertaking contingency planning, preparedness exercises and the upskilling of the healthcare and public health workforce as well as the establishment, in accordance with national strategies, of mechanisms for the efficient monitoring and needs-driven distribution or allocation of goods and services needed in times of crisis.
(17)
The provision of information to individuals plays an important role in preventing and responding to diseases. The Programme should therefore support communication activities addressed to the general public or to specific groups of people or professionals, in order to promote disease prevention and healthy lifestyles, to counter misinformation and disinformation as regards the prevention, cause and treatment of diseases, to address vaccine hesitancy and to support efforts to strengthen altruistic behaviour, such as organ and blood donations, in a manner that complements national campaigns on those matters.
(18)
In synergy with other Union programmes, such as the Digital Europe programme established by a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing the Digital Europe programme and repealing Decision (EU) 2015/2240, Horizon Europe - the Framework Programme for Research and Innovation established by a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing Horizon Europe – the Framework Programme for Research and Innovation, laying down its rules for participation and dissemination and repealing Regulations (EU) No 1290/2013 and (EU) No 1291/2013 (‘Horizon Europe’), the European Regional Development Fund (‘ERDF’) established by a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on the European Regional Development Fund and on the Cohesion Fund, the European Social Fund Plus (ESF+) established by a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on the European Social Fund Plus (ESF+), the InvestEU Programme established by Regulation (EU) 2021/523 of the European Parliament and of the Council (10), and the Recovery and Resilience Facility established by Regulation (EU) 2021/241 of the European Parliament and of the Council (11), actions that advance the digital transformation of health services and increase the interoperability of such services, including the development of a European health data space, could be supported under the Programme.
(19)
Health is an investment, and the Programme should have this concept at its core. Keeping people healthy and active longer and empowering them to take an active role in managing their health by improving their health literacy will have positive effects on health, health inequalities and inequities, access to sexual and reproductive healthcare, quality of life, workers’ health, productivity, competitiveness and inclusiveness, while reducing pressures on national healthcare systems and national budgets. The Programme should also support actions to reduce inequalities in the provision of healthcare, in particular in rural and remote areas, including in the outermost regions, for the purposes of achieving inclusive growth. The Commission has committed to helping Member States to reach the sustainable development targets set in the UN resolution of 25 September 2015 entitled ‘Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development’(the ‘UN 2030 Agenda’), in particular Sustainable Development Goal 3 ‘Ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all at all ages’. The Programme should therefore contribute to the actions towards reaching those targets.
(20)
Non-communicable diseases are often the result of a combination of genetic, physiological, environmental and behavioural factors. Non-communicable diseases such as cardiovascular disease, cancer, mental illness, neurological disorders, chronic respiratory disease and diabetes represent major causes of disability, ill-health, health-related retirement, and premature death in the Union, and cause a considerable social and economic impact. To decrease the impact of non-communicable diseases on individuals and society in the Union and to reach Goal 3 of the UN 2030 Agenda Sustainable Development Goals, in particular but not exclusively Target 3.4 of that Goal, namely to reduce premature mortality from non-communicable diseases by one third by 2030, it is essential to provide an integrated response that focuses on health promotion and disease prevention across relevant sectors.
(21)
The Programme therefore should support health promotion and disease prevention and improve mental health throughout the lifetime of an individual by addressing health risk factors, and health determinants, which would also contribute to the attainment of Goal 3 of the UN 2030 Agenda Sustainable Development Goals. The Programme should also therefore contribute to the objectives set out in the Commission communication of 11 December 2019 entitled ‘The European Green Deal’ (the ‘European Green Deal’).
(22)
The Programme should continue to support actions in the area of reducing and preventing alcohol-related harm, with particular emphasis on protecting the young.
(23)
The burden of chronic diseases is significant in the Union. It is well acknowledged that prevention and early detection are important in that regard. The Programme should support actions in those areas and should support the development of specific Union preventive and disease management guidelines and therefore aim to reduce the burden of Member States by working together to achieve better and more effective management of chronic diseases. Demographic changes, in particular the ageing of society, challenge the sustainability of health systems. Age-related diseases and disorders, such as dementia, and age-related disabilities, necessitate specific attention.
(24)
Cancer is the second leading cause of mortality in the Member States after cardiovascular disease. It is also one of the non-communicable diseases that share common risk factors and the prevention and control of which would benefit the majority of citizens. Poor nutrition, physical inactivity, obesity, tobacco use and harmful use of alcohol are risk factors common to other chronic diseases, such as cardiovascular disease, and therefore cancer prevention programmes should be implemented within the context of an integrated approach to preventing chronic diseases. Relevant measures in the ‘Europe’s Beating Cancer Plan’ set out in the communication of the Commission of 3 February 2021 should benefit from the Programme and from Horizon Europe’s mission on cancer, and should contribute to fostering an integrated approach that covers prevention, screening, early diagnosis, monitoring, treatment and care, as well as improving the quality of life of patients and survivors.
(25)
It should be possible to support studies on the influence of gender on the characteristics of diseases in order to contribute to improving knowledge and education in that area, thereby improving prevention, diagnosis, monitoring and treatment.
(26)
The Programme should work in synergy with and in a manner that complements other Union policies, programmes and funds, such as the Digital Europe Programme, Horizon Europe, the rescEU reserve under the Union Civil Protection Mechanism established by Decision (EU) 2019/420 of the European Parliament and of the Council (12) (the ‘rescEU reserve’), the Emergency Support Instrument established by Council Regulation (EU) 2016/369 (13), the ESF+, of which the Employment and Social Innovation strand forms part, including as regards synergies in relation to better protecting the health and safety of millions of workers in the Union, the InvestEU Programme, the Single Market Programme established by a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing a programme for the internal market, competitiveness of enterprises, including small and medium-sized enterprises, the area of plants, animals, food and feed, and European statistics (Single Market Programme) and repealing Regulations (EU) No 99/2013, (EU) No 1287/2013, (EU) No 254/2014 and (EU) No 652/2014, the ERDF, the Recovery and Resilience Facility, Erasmus+ established by a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing Erasmus+: the Union Programme for education and training, youth and sport and repealing Regulation (EU) No 1288/2013, the European Solidarity Corps Programme established by a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing the European Solidarity Corps Programme and repealing Regulations (EU) 2018/1475 and (EU) No 375/2014,
and external action instruments of the Union, such as the Neighbourhood, Development and International Cooperation Instrument established by a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing the Neighbourhood, Development and International Cooperation Instrument – Global Europe, amending and repealing Decision No 466/2014/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council and repealing Regulation (EU) 2017/1601 of the European Parliament and of the Council and Council Regulation (EC, Euratom) No 480/2009, and the Instrument for Pre-accession Assistance III established by a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing the Instrument for Pre-accession Assistance (IPA III). Where appropriate, common rules should be established with a view to ensuring that there is consistency and complementarity between Union policies, programmes and funds, while ensuring that the specificities of those policies are respected, and with a view to aligning with the strategic requirements of those policies, programmes and funds, such as the enabling conditions under the ERDF and ESF+. The Commission and the Member States should ensure that such synergies and complementarities are duly taken into consideration when drafting the annual work programmes as provided for in this Regulation.
(27)
The Commission should consult the Member States through a ‘EU4Health Steering Group’ to be established by this Regulation on the priorities and strategic orientations of the Programme, in order to ensure that there is consistency and complementarity between the Programme and other policies, instruments and actions of the Union, as well as on the implementation of the Programme.
(28)
The Programme should contribute to the establishment of a reserve of essential crisis-relevant products, in synergy and complementarity with the rescEU reserve, with the emergency support established under Regulation (EU) 2016/369, with the Recovery and Resilience Facility and with other Union policies, programmes and funds, complementing national stockpiles at Union level where needed.
(29)
Given rising healthcare demand, Member States’ healthcare systems face challenges regarding the availability and affordability of medicinal products. To ensure that there is better public health protection, as well as that patients in the Union are safe and empowered, it is essential that patients and health systems have access to sustainable, efficient, equitable, affordable and high-quality medicinal products, including in the cross-border context, and that they can fully benefit from those medicinal products on the basis of transparent, consistent, and patient-oriented medical information.
(30)
Given rising healthcare demand, inter alia, the Programme should support the development of a Union system for the monitoring, reporting and notification of shortages of medicinal products and medical devices in order to avoid fragmentation of the internal market and to ensure greater availability and affordability of those medicinal products and medical devices while limiting the extent to which their supply chains depend on third countries. The Programme should therefore encourage the production of medicinal products and medical devices within the Union. In particular, in order to address unmet medical needs, the Programme should provide support to the generation of clinical and real-world evidence to enable the development of, authorisation of, evaluation of and access to effective medicinal products, including generics and biosimilars, to medical devices and to treatment, should promote research and development with respect to new medicinal products, with particular attention to be given to antimicrobials and vaccines to tackle antimicrobial resistance and vaccine-preventable diseases, respectively, should promote incentives to boost the production capacity for antimicrobials, personalised treatment and vaccination, and should foster the digital transformation of healthcare products and platforms for monitoring and collecting information on medicinal products. The Programme should also strengthen decision-making regarding medicinal products by enabling access to and the analysis of real-world healthcare data. The Programme should also help to ensure that the best use is made of research results and facilitate the uptake, scaling-up and deployment of health innovations in healthcare systems and clinical practice.
(31)
As the optimal delivery and use of medicinal products, and of antimicrobials in particular, yield benefits for individuals and health systems, the Programme should promote their prudent and efficient use in accordance with the One Health approach, with the ‘European One Health Action Plan against Antimicrobial Resistance (AMR)’ set out in the communication of the Commission of 29 June 2017, and with the ‘European Union Strategic Approach to Pharmaceuticals in the Environment’ set out in the communication of the Commission of 11 March 2019. The Programme should also foster measures to strengthen the assessment and appropriate management of environmental risks associated with the production, use and disposal of medicinal products.
(32)
Union health legislation has an immediate impact on public health, on the lives of people, on the efficiency and resilience of health systems and on the proper functioning of the internal market. The regulatory framework for medical products and technologies, including medicinal products, medical devices and substances of human origin, and the regulatory frameworks for tobacco, patients’ rights in cross-border healthcare and serious cross-border threats to health, are essential to the protection of health in the Union. The Programme therefore should support the development, implementation and enforcement of Union health legislation and, in conjunction with relevant bodies such as EMA and ECDC, should provide high-quality, comparable and reliable data, including real-world healthcare data, to support policymaking and monitoring, set targets and develop tools to measure progress.
(33)
European Reference Networks (ERNs), which were established pursuant to Directive 2011/24/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council (14), are virtual networks of healthcare providers across Europe. They aim to facilitate discussion regarding complex or rare diseases and conditions that require highly specialised treatment, and concentrated knowledge and resources. As ERNs can improve the access to diagnosis and the provision of high-quality healthcare to patients with rare conditions and can be focal points for medical training and research and dissemination of information, the Programme should contribute to the upscaling of networking through ERNs and other transnational networks.
(34)
ERNs and cross-border cooperation in the provision of healthcare to patients moving between Member States are examples of areas where integrated work between Member States has been shown to have strong added value and great potential to increase the efficiency of health systems and thus to improve public health in general. Collaboration as regards HTA is another area that is bringing added value to Member States. The Programme should therefore support activities that enable integrated and sustained coordinated work, thereby also serving to foster the implementation of best practices that are aimed at distributing the available resources to the population and areas concerned in the most effective way so as to maximise their impact.
(35)
Regulation (EU, Euratom) 2018/1046 of the European Parliament and of the Council (15) (the ‘Financial Regulation’) applies to this Programme. The Financial Regulation lays down rules on the implementation of the Union budget, including the rules on grants, prizes, procurement, indirect management, financial instruments, budgetary guarantees, financial assistance and the reimbursement of external experts.
(36)
The types of financing and the methods of implementation under this Regulation should be chosen on the basis of their ability to achieve the specific objectives of the actions concerned and to deliver results, taking into account, in particular, the costs of controls, the administrative burden, and the expected risk of non-compliance. That choice should include consideration of the use of lump sums, flat-rate financing and unit costs, as well as the use of financing that is not linked to costs as envisaged in Article 125(1) of the Financial Regulation. Technical and financial reporting requirements for the beneficiaries should be such as to ensure that there is compliance with applicable financial provisions while minimising the administrative burden.
(37)
In order to optimise the added value and impact from investments funded wholly or in part through the budget of the Union, synergies should be sought in particular between the Programme and other Union programmes, including those under shared-management. To maximise those synergies, and avoid duplications, appropriate mechanisms should be provided for, including cumulative funding in an action from the Programme and another Union programme, as long as such cumulative funding does not exceed the total eligible costs of the action. For that purpose, this Regulation should set out appropriate rules, in particular on the possibility of declaring the same cost or expenditure on a pro-rata basis under the Programme and another Union programme, in order to ensure that there is detailed and transparent reporting.
(38)
Given the specific nature of the objectives and actions covered by the Programme, the respective competent authorities of the Member States will be best placed, in some cases, to implement actions related to the Programme. Those authorities, designated by the Member States, should therefore be considered to be identified beneficiaries for the purpose of Article 195 of the Financial Regulation and grants should therefore be awarded to those authorities without the prior publication of calls for proposals. Investments under the Programme should be implemented in close cooperation with Member States.
(39)
Under Article 193(2) of the Financial Regulation, a grant may be awarded for an action, which has already begun, provided that the applicant can demonstrate the need to start the action prior to the signature of the grant agreement. However, costs incurred prior to the date of submission of the grant application are not eligible costs, except in duly justified exceptional cases. In order to avoid any disruption to Union support which could be prejudicial to the Union’s interests, it should be possible to provide for the eligibility of activities and costs from the beginning of the 2021 financial year in the financing decision, for a limited period at the beginning of the multiannual financial framework 2021-2027, and only in duly justified cases, even if those activities were implemented and those costs were incurred before the grant application was submitted.
(40)
ERNs are approved by the Board of Member States of the ERNs, following the approval procedure set out in Commission Implementing Decision 2014/287/EU (16). ERNs should therefore be considered to be identified beneficiaries for the purpose of Article 195 of the Financial Regulation, and the grants to ERNs should therefore be awarded without prior publication of calls for proposals. Direct grants should also be awarded to other entities that have been designated in accordance with Union rules, for example reference laboratories and centres, centres of excellence and transnational networks.
(41)
Given the commonly agreed values of solidarity in relation to equitable and universal coverage of quality health services as a basis for the Union’s policies in this area and the fact that the Union has a central role to play in accelerating progress, coordination and cooperation in tackling global health challenges as set out in the Council conclusions of 10 May 2010 on the EU role in Global Health, and as expressed in the UN 2030 Agenda Sustainable Development Goals, the Programme should reinforce the Union’s support for international and global health initiatives, in particular for initiatives by the WHO, with a view to improving health, addressing health inequalities and strengthening protection against global health threats.
(42)
In order to maximise the effectiveness and efficiency of actions at Union and international level, cooperation should be developed with relevant international organisations such as the United Nations and the World Bank, as well as with the Council of Europe and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), when implementing the Programme. In order to increase impact, synergies should also be sought with the national organisations of Member States that are active in global health. In accordance with Council Decision 2013/755/EU (17), persons and entities established in Overseas Countries and Territories (OCTs) should be eligible for funding under the Programme, subject to the rules and objectives of the Programme and to possible arrangements applicable to the Member State to which the relevant OCTs are linked.
(43)
The implementation of the Programme should be supported by extensive outreach activities to ensure that the views and needs of civil society are duly represented and taken into account. To this end, the Commission should seek feedback on the Programme’s priorities and strategic orientations and on the needs to be addressed through its actions from relevant stakeholders once a year, including from representatives of civil society and patients’ associations, academics and organisations of healthcare professionals. Each year, before the end of the preparatory work for the work programmes, the Commission should also inform the European Parliament about the progress regarding such preparatory work and on the outcome of its outreach activities towards stakeholders.
(44)
Third countries which are members of the European Economic Area (EEA) are able to participate in Union programmes in the framework of the cooperation established under the Agreement on the European Economic Area (18), which provides for the implementation of such programmes on the basis of a decision adopted under that agreement. A specific provision should be introduced in this Regulation requiring third countries that participate in the Programme to grant the necessary rights and access required for the authorising officer responsible, the European Anti-Fraud Office (OLAF) and the Court of Auditors to comprehensively exercise their respective competences.
(45)
Cooperation with third countries should be strengthened as regards the exchange of knowledge and best practices in order to improve health systems’ preparedness and response capacity.
(46)
In accordance with the Financial Regulation, Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 883/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council (19) and Council Regulations (EC, Euratom) No 2988/95 (20), (Euratom, EC) No 2185/96 (21) and (EU) 2017/1939 (22), the financial interests of the Union are to be protected by means of proportionate measures, including measures relating to the prevention, detection, correction and investigation of irregularities, including fraud, to the recovery of funds lost, wrongly paid or incorrectly used, and, where appropriate, to the imposition of administrative penalties. In particular, in accordance with Regulations (Euratom, EC) No 2185/96 and (EU, Euratom) No 883/2013, OLAF has the power to carry out administrative investigations, including on-the-spot checks and inspections, with a view to establishing whether there has been fraud, corruption or any other illegal activity affecting the financial interests of the Union. The European Public Prosecutor’s Office (EPPO) is empowered, in accordance with Regulation (EU) 2017/1939, to investigate and prosecute criminal offences affecting the financial interests of the Union, as provided for in Directive (EU) 2017/1371 of the European Parliament and of the Council (23).
(47)
In accordance with the Financial Regulation, any person or entity receiving Union funds is to fully cooperate in the protection of the financial interests of the Union, grant the necessary rights and access to the Commission, OLAF, the Court of Auditors and, in respect of those Member States participating in enhanced cooperation pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2017/1939, the EPPO, and ensure that any third parties involved in the implementation of Union funds grant equivalent rights.
(48)
Horizontal financial rules adopted by the European Parliament and the Council on the basis of Article 322 TFEU apply to this Regulation. Those rules are laid down in the Financial Regulation and determine in particular the procedure for establishing and implementing the budget through grants, procurement, prizes, indirect implementation, financial instruments, budgetary guarantees, financial assistance and the reimbursement of external experts and provide for checks on the responsibility of financial actors. Rules adopted on the basis of Article 322 TFEU also include a general regime of conditionality for the protection of the Union budget.
(49)
Reflecting the importance of tackling climate change in line with the Union’s commitments to implement the Paris Agreement adopted under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and the UN Agenda 2030 Sustainable Development Goals, the Programme should contribute to mainstreaming climate action in the Union’s policies and to the achievement of an overall target of at least 30 % of the total amount of the Union budget and the European Union Recovery Instrument, established by Council Regulation (EU) 2020/2094 (24), expenditures, supporting climate objectives. The Programme should support activities that would respect the climate and environmental standards and priorities of the Union and the ‘do no harm’ principle of the European Green Deal. Relevant actions should be identified during the Programme’s preparation and implementation, and reassessed in the context of its interim evaluation.
(50)
According to Article 8 TFEU, in all its activities, the Union shall aim to eliminate inequalities and to promote equality between men and women. Gender equality, as well as rights and equal opportunities for all, and the mainstreaming of those objectives should be taken into account and promoted throughout the assessment, preparation, implementation and monitoring of the Programme.
(51)
It should be possible for the policy objectives of the Programme to also be addressed through financial instruments and budgetary guarantees under the InvestEU Fund provided for by the InvestEU Programme. Financial support should be used to address market failures and sub-optimal investment situations, in a proportionate manner. Actions funded by the Programme should not duplicate or crowd out private financing or distort competition in the internal market. In general, actions should have Union added value.
(52)
The implementation of the Programme should be such that the responsibilities of the Member States for the definition of their health policies and for the organisation and delivery of health services and medical care are respected. Strong involvement of Member States in the governance and implementation of the Programme should be ensured.
(53)
Given the nature and potential scale of cross-border threats to health, the objectives of protecting people in the Union from such threats and increasing health crisis prevention and preparedness cannot be sufficiently achieved by the Member States acting alone. In accordance with the principle of subsidiarity as set out in Article 5 TEU, action at Union level can also be taken to support Member States’ efforts in the pursuit of a high level of protection of public health, to improve the availability, sustainability, acceptability, accessibility, safety and affordability in the Union of medicinal products, medical devices and crisis-relevant products and services, to support innovation, to support integrated and coordinated work and the implementation of best practices among Member States, and to address inequalities and inequities in access to healthcare throughout the Union in a manner that creates efficiency gains and value-added impacts that could not be generated by action taken at national level, while respecting the Member States’ competence and responsibility in the areas covered by the Programme. In accordance with the principle of proportionality, as set out in that Article, this Regulation does not go beyond what is necessary in order to achieve those objectives.
(54)
In order to allow possible adjustments necessary to achieve the Programme’s objectives to be made, the power to adopt acts in accordance with Article 290 TFEU should be delegated to the Commission in respect of the review, amendment and addition of the indicators set out in Annex II to this Regulation. It is of particular importance that the Commission carry out appropriate consultations during its preparatory work, including at expert level, and that those consultations be conducted in accordance with the principles laid down in the Interinstitutional Agreement of 13 April 2016 on Better Law-Making (25). In particular, to ensure equal participation in the preparation of delegated acts, the European Parliament and the Council receive all documents at the same time as Member States’ experts, and their experts systematically have access to meetings of Commission expert groups dealing with the preparation of delegated acts.
(55)
Member States and participating countries have designated National Focal Points to assist the Commission in the promotion of the third Programme for the Union’s action in the field of health (2014-2020) established by Regulation (EU) No 282/2014, and, where relevant, in the dissemination of its results and the information available on its impact in the Member States and participating countries. Given the importance of such activities, it is appropriate to support such activities under the Programme in order to continue them.
(56)
In order to ensure uniform conditions for the implementation of this Regulation, implementing powers should be conferred on the Commission to adopt implementing acts establishing annual work programmes in accordance with the criteria set out in this Regulation, approving certain eligible actions and establishing rules on technical and administrative arrangements necessary for the implementation of the actions of the Programme and on uniform templates for the collection of data necessary to monitor the implementation of the Programme. Those powers should be exercised in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 of European Parliament and of the Council (26). The examination procedure should be used for the adoption of those implementing acts given that they relate to a programme with substantial implications.
(57)
The value and impact of the Programme should be regularly and closely monitored and evaluated. The evaluation should focus on the goals of the Programme and take into account the fact that the achievement of the Programme’s objectives could require a period that is longer than the length of the Programme. To that end, an interim evaluation report should be drawn up, as well as an evaluation report at the end of the Programme, in order to assess the implementation of the priorities of the Programme.
(58)
As the third Programme for the Union’s action in the field of health (2014-2020) has come to an end, Regulation (EU) No 282/2014 has become obsolete and should be repealed.
(59)
In order to ensure continuity in providing support in the field of health and to allow implementation to start from the beginning of the multiannual financial framework 2021-2027, this Regulation should enter into force as a matter of urgency and should apply, with retroactive effect, from 1 January 2021,
HAVE ADOPTED THIS REGULATION:
