Article 11
Recovery targets
1.   Regarding all WEEE separately collected in accordance with Article 5 and sent for treatment in accordance with Articles 8, 9 and 10, Member States shall ensure that producers meet the minimum targets set out in Annex V.
2.   The achievement of the targets shall be calculated, for each category, by dividing the weight of the WEEE that enters the recovery or recycling/preparing for re-use facility, after proper treatment in accordance with Article 8(2) with regard to recovery or recycling, by the weight of all separately collected WEEE for each category, expressed as a percentage.
Preliminary activities including sorting and storage prior to recovery shall not count towards the achievement of these targets.
3.   In order to ensure uniform conditions for the implementation of this Article, the Commission may adopt implementing acts establishing additional rules on the calculation methods for the application of the minimum targets. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 21(2).
4.   Member States shall ensure that, for the purpose of calculating these targets, producers or third parties acting on their behalf keep records on the weight of WEEE, its components, materials or substances when leaving (output) the collection facility, entering (input) and leaving (output) the treatment facilities and when entering (input) the recovery or recycling/preparing for re-use facility.
Member States shall also ensure that, for the purposes of paragraph 6, records on the weight of products and materials when leaving (output) the recovery or recycling/preparing for re-use facility are kept.
5.   Member States shall encourage the development of new recovery, recycling and treatment technologies.
6.   On the basis of a report of the Commission accompanied, if appropriate, by a legislative proposal, the European Parliament and the Council shall, by 14 August 2016, re-examine the recovery targets referred to in Annex V, Part 3, examine the possibility of setting separate targets for WEEE to be prepared for re-use and re-examine the calculation method referred to in paragraph 2 with a view to analysing the feasibility of setting targets on the basis of products and materials resulting (output) from the recovery, recycling and preparation for re-use processes.
