Article 16
Registration, information and reporting
1.   Member States shall, in accordance with paragraph 2, draw up a register of producers, including producers supplying EEE by means of distance communication. That register shall serve to monitor compliance with the requirements of this Directive.
Producers supplying EEE by means of distance communication as defined in Article 3(1)(f)(iv) shall be registered in the Member State that they sell to. Where such producers are not registered in the Member State that they are selling to, they shall be registered through their authorised representatives as referred to in Article 17(2).
2.   Member States shall ensure that:
(a)
each producer, or each authorised representative where appointed under Article 17, is registered as required and has the possibility of entering online in their national register all relevant information reflecting that producer’s activities in that Member State;
(b)
upon registering, each producer, or each authorised representative where appointed under Article 17, provides the information set out in Annex X, Part A, undertaking to update it as appropriate;
(c)
each producer, or each authorised representative where appointed under Article 17, provides the information set out in Annex X, Part B;
(d)
national registers provide links to other national registers on their website to facilitate, in all Member States, registration of producers or, where appointed under Article 17, authorised representatives.
3.   In order to ensure uniform conditions for the implementation of this Article, the Commission shall adopt implementing acts establishing the format for registration and reporting and the frequency of reporting to the register. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 21(2).
4.   Member States shall collect information, including substantiated estimates, on an annual basis, on the quantities and categories of EEE placed on their markets, collected through all routes, prepared for re-use, recycled and recovered within the Member State, and on separately collected WEEE exported, by weight.
5.   Member States shall, at three-year intervals, send a report to the Commission on the implementation of this Directive and on the information set out in paragraph 4. The implementation report shall be drawn up on the basis of a questionnaire laid down in Commission Decisions 2004/249/EC (26) and 2005/369/EC (27). The report shall be made available to the Commission within nine months of the end of the three-year period covered by it.
The first report shall cover the period from 14 February 2014 to 31 December 2015.
The Commission shall publish a report on the implementation of this Directive within nine months after receiving the reports from the Member States.
