Article 8
Proper treatment
1.   Member States shall ensure that all separately collected WEEE undergoes proper treatment.
2.   Proper treatment, other than preparing for re-use, and recovery or recycling operations shall, as a minimum, include the removal of all fluids and a selective treatment in accordance with Annex VII.
3.   Member States shall ensure that producers or third parties acting on their behalf set up systems to provide for the recovery of WEEE using best available techniques. The systems may be set up by producers individually or collectively. Member States shall ensure that any establishment or undertaking carrying out collection or treatment operations stores and treats WEEE in compliance with the technical requirements set out in Annex VIII.
4.   The Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 20 concerning the amendment of Annex VII in order to introduce other treatment technologies that ensure at least the same level of protection for human health and the environment.
The Commission shall evaluate, as a matter of priority, whether the entries regarding printed circuit boards for mobile phones and liquid crystal displays need to be amended. The Commission is invited to evaluate whether amendments to Annex VII are necessary to address nanomaterials contained in EEE.
5.   For the purposes of environmental protection, Member States may set up minimum quality standards for the treatment of the WEEE that has been collected.
Member States which opt for such quality standards shall inform the Commission thereof, which shall publish these standards.
The Commission shall, not later than 14 February 2013, request the European standardisation organisations to develop European standards for the treatment, including recovery, recycling and preparing for re-use, of WEEE. Those standards shall reflect the state of the art.
In order to ensure uniform conditions for the implementation of this Article, the Commission may adopt implementing acts laying down minimum quality standards based in particular on the standards developed by the European standardisation organisations. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 21(2).
A reference to the standards adopted by the Commission shall be published.
6.   Member States shall encourage establishments or undertakings which carry out treatment operations to introduce certified environmental management systems in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 1221/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 November 2009 on the voluntary participation by organisations in a Community eco-management and audit scheme (EMAS) (23).
