Article 11
Survey on agricultural production methods
1.   Member States shall carry out a survey on agricultural production methods used by agricultural holdings. This survey may be carried out as a sample survey.
2.   In duly justified cases, the Commission may allow a Member State to carry out the sample survey using separate sub-samples.
3.   Member States shall provide information on the characteristics of the agricultural production methods listed in Annex V.
4.   For each holding surveyed, Member States shall also provide an estimation of the volume of water used for irrigation on the holding (in cubic metres). The estimation may be produced by means of a model.
5.   The Commission shall provide Member States with methodological and other support in order to construct the model referred to in paragraph 4. In addition, the Commission shall promote the necessary cooperation and sharing of experiences between Member States in order to obtain comparable results.
6.   If a Member State determines that a characteristic has a low or zero prevalence, the characteristic may be excluded from the data collection. That Member State shall inform the Commission in the calendar year immediately preceding the survey year about any characteristic excluded from the data collection.
7.   The definitions of the characteristics shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 15(2).
8.   The reference period shall coincide with the reference periods used for the characteristics of the farm structure survey in 2010.
9.   The results of this survey shall be linked to the data obtained from the farm structure survey in 2010 at the level of individual agricultural holdings. The combined validated data set shall be transmitted to the Commission in electronic form by 31 December 2012 at the latest.
10.   The Commission shall determine the format for the transmission of the survey data.
11.   The data on agricultural production methods shall not be used by the Commission for drawing samples or for carrying out surveys.
