Article 7
Application and permit
1.   No waste facility shall be allowed to operate without a permit granted by the competent authority. The permit shall contain the elements specified in paragraph 2 of this Article and shall clearly indicate the category of the waste facility in accordance with the criteria referred to in Article 9.
Subject to compliance with all requirements under this Article, any permit produced pursuant to other national or Community legislation may be combined to form a single permit, where such a format obviates the unnecessary duplication of information and the repetition of work by the operator or competent authority. The details specified in paragraph 2 can be covered by one single permit or several permits, provided that all requirements under this Article are complied with.
2.   The application for a permit shall contain at least the following details:
(a)
the identity of the operator;
(b)
the proposed location of the waste facility, including any possible alternative locations;
(c)
the waste management plan pursuant to Article 5;
(d)
adequate arrangements by way of a financial guarantee or equivalent, as required under Article 14;
(e)
the information provided by the operator in accordance with Article 5 of Directive 85/337/EEC (19) if an environmental impact assessment is required under that Directive.
3.   The competent authority shall only grant a permit if it is satisfied that:
(a)
the operator complies with the relevant requirements under this Directive;
(b)
the management of waste does not conflict directly or otherwise interfere with the implementation of the relevant waste management plan or plans referred to in Article 7 of Directive 75/442/EEC.
4.   Member States shall take the necessary measures to ensure that competent authorities periodically reconsider and, where necessary, update permit conditions:
—
where there are substantial changes in the operation of the waste facility or the waste deposited;
—
on the basis of monitoring results reported by the operator pursuant to Article 11(3) or inspections carried out pursuant to Article 17;
—
in the light of information exchange on substantial changes in best available techniques under Article 21(3).
5.   The information contained in a permit granted under this Article shall be made available to the competent national and Community statistical authorities where requested for statistical purposes. Sensitive information of a purely commercial nature, such as information concerning business relations and cost components and the volume of economic mineral reserves, shall not be made public.
