Whereas:
(1)
The Communication of the Commission entitled ‘Safe operation of mining activities: a follow-up to recent mining accidents’ sets out as one of its priority actions an initiative to regulate the management of waste from the extractive industries. This action is designed to complement initiatives pursuant to Directive 2003/105/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 December 2003 amending Council Directive 96/82/EC on the control of major-accident hazards involving dangerous substances (4) as well as the production of a best available technique document covering the management of waste rock and tailings from mining activities under the auspices of Council Directive 96/61/EC of 24 September 1996 concerning integrated pollution prevention and control (5).
(2)
In its Resolution (6) of 5 July 2001 concerning that Communication, the European Parliament strongly supported the need for a Directive on waste from the extractive industries.
(3)
Decision No 1600/2002/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 July 2002 laying down the Sixth Community Environment Action Programme (7) sets as the objective for wastes that are still generated that the level of their hazardousness should be reduced and that they should present as little risk as possible, that preference should be given to recovery and especially to recycling, that the quantity of waste for disposal should be minimised and should be safely disposed of, and that waste intended for disposal should be treated as closely as possible to the place of its generation to the extent that this does not lead to a decrease in the efficiency of waste treatment operations. Decision No 1600/2002/EC also prescribes as a priority action, with reference to accidents and disasters, the development of measures to help prevent major accident hazards, with special regard to those arising from mining, and the development of measures on mining waste. Decision No 1600/2002/EC also sets as a priority action the promotion of sustainable management of extractive industries with a view to reducing their environmental impact.
(4)
In accordance with the objectives of Community policy on the environment, it is necessary to lay down minimum requirements in order to prevent or reduce as far as possible any adverse effects on the environment or on human health which are brought about as a result of the management of waste from the extractive industries, such as tailings (i.e. the waste solids or slurries that remain after the treatment of minerals by a number of techniques), waste rock and overburden (i.e. the material that extractive operations move during the process of accessing an ore or mineral body, including during the pre-production development stage), and topsoil (i.e. the upper layer of the ground) provided that they constitute waste as defined in Council Directive 75/442/EEC of 15 July 1975 on waste (8).
(5)
In accordance with paragraph 24 of the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation on Sustainable Development adopted within the framework of the United Nations at the 2002 World Summit on Sustainable Development, it is necessary to protect the natural resource base of economic and social development and reverse the current trend in natural resource degradation by managing the natural resource base in a sustainable and integrated manner.
(6)
Accordingly, this Directive should cover the management of waste from land-based extractive industries, that is to say, the waste arising from the prospecting, extraction (including the pre‐production development stage), treatment and storage of mineral resources and from the working of quarries. However, such management should reflect the principles and priorities identified in Directive 75/442/EEC, which, in accordance with Article 2(1)(b)(ii) thereof, continues to apply to any aspects of the management of waste from the extractive industries which are not covered by this Directive.
(7)
In order to avoid duplication and disproportionate administrative requirements, the scope of this Directive should be limited to those particular operations considered to be a priority for the purposes of meeting its objectives.
(8)
Accordingly, the provisions of this Directive should not apply to those waste streams which, albeit generated in the course of mineral extraction or treatment operations, are not directly linked to the extraction or treatment process, e.g. food waste, waste oil, end-of-life vehicles, spent batteries and accumulators. The management of such waste should be subject to the provisions of Directive 75/442/EEC or of Council Directive 1999/31/EC of 26 April 1999 on the landfill of waste (9) or any other relevant Community legislation, as is the case for waste generated at a prospecting, extraction or treatment site and transported to a location that is not a waste facility according to this Directive.
(9)
Nor should this Directive apply to waste resulting from the offshore prospecting, extraction and treatment of mineral resources or to the injection of water and re‐injection of pumped groundwater, while inert waste, non-hazardous prospecting waste, unpolluted soil and waste resulting from the extraction, treatment and storage of peat should be covered only by a limited set of requirements due to their lower environmental risks. For non‐hazardous non‐inert waste, Member States may reduce or waive certain requirements. However, these exemptions should not apply to Category A waste facilities.
(10)
Moreover, while covering the management of waste from the extractive industries which may be radioactive, this Directive should not cover such aspects as are specific to radioactivity, which are a matter dealt with under the Treaty establishing the European Atomic Energy Community (Euratom).
(11)
In order to remain true to the principles and priorities identified in Directive 75/442/EEC and, in particular, Articles 3 and 4 thereof, Member States should ensure that operators engaged in the extractive industry take all necessary measures to prevent or reduce as far as possible any negative effects, actual or potential, on the environment or on human health which are brought about as a result of the management of waste from the extractive industries.
(12)
These measures should be based, inter alia, on the concept of best available techniques as defined in Directive 96/61/EC and, when such techniques are applied, it is for the Member States to determine how the technical characteristics of the waste facility, its geographical location and local environmental conditions can, where appropriate, be taken into consideration.
(13)
Member States should ensure that operators in the extractive industry draw up appropriate waste management plans for the prevention or minimisation, treatment, recovery and disposal of extractive waste. Such plans should be structured in such a way as to ensure appropriate planning of waste management options with a view to minimising waste generation and its harmfulness, and encouraging waste recovery. Moreover, waste from the extractive industries should be characterised with respect to its composition in order to ensure that, as far as possible, such waste reacts only in predictable ways.
(14)
In order to minimise the risk of accidents and to guarantee a high level of protection for the environment and human health, Member States should ensure that each operator of a Category A waste facility adopts and applies a major-accident prevention policy for waste. In terms of preventive measures, this should entail the delivery of a safety management system, emergency plans to be used in the event of accidents and the dissemination of safety information to persons likely to be affected by a major accident. In the event of an accident, operators should be required to provide the competent authorities with all the relevant information necessary to mitigate actual or potential environmental damage. These particular requirements should not apply to those waste facilities from the extractive industries falling within the scope of Directive 96/82/EC.
(15)
A waste facility should not be classified in Category A solely on the basis of risks to the safety and health protection of workers in the extractive industries covered by other Community legislation, in particular Directives 92/91/EEC (10) and 92/104/EEC (11).
(16)
Because of the special nature of the management of waste from the extractive industries, it is necessary to introduce specific application and permit procedures in respect of waste facilities used to receive such waste. In addition, Member States should take the necessary measures to ensure that the competent authorities periodically reconsider and, where necessary, update permit conditions.
(17)
Member States should be required to ensure that, in accordance with the UNECE Convention on Access to Information, Public Participation in Decision-making and Access to Justice in Environmental Matters of 25 June 1998 (Aarhus Convention), the public are informed of the application for a waste management permit and the public concerned are consulted prior to the granting of a waste management permit.
(18)
It is necessary to indicate clearly the requirements with which waste facilities servicing the extractive industries should comply as regards location, management, control, closure and preventive and protective measures to be taken against any threat to the environment in the short and long-term perspectives, and more especially against the pollution of groundwater by leachate infiltration into the soil.
(19)
It is necessary to define clearly Category A waste facilities used to service waste from the extractive industries, taking into account the likely effects of any pollution resulting from the operation of such a facility or from an accident in which waste escapes from such a facility.
(20)
Waste placed back into the excavation voids either for their rehabilitation or for construction purposes related to the mineral extraction process, such as the building or maintenance within voids of means of access for machinery, haulage ramps, bulkheads, safety barricades or berms, needs also to be subject to certain requirements in order to protect surface water and/or groundwater, secure the stability of such waste, and ensure appropriate monitoring upon cessation of such activities. Accordingly, such waste should not be subject to the requirements of this Directive which relate exclusively to ‘waste facilities’, except for the requirements mentioned in the specific provision on excavation voids.
(21)
With a view to ensuring the proper construction and maintenance of waste facilities servicing waste from the extractive industries, Member States should take appropriate measures to ensure that the design, location and management of such facilities is carried out by technically competent persons. It is necessary to ensure that the training and knowledge acquired by operators and staff afford them the necessary skills. In addition, competent authorities should satisfy themselves that operators ensure suitable arrangements with respect to the construction and maintenance of a new waste facility or to any extension or modification of an existing waste facility, including in the after-closure phase.
(22)
It is necessary to establish monitoring procedures during the operation and after‐closure of waste facilities. An after‐closure period for monitoring and control of Category A waste facilities should be laid down proportionate to the risk posed by the individual waste facility, in a way similar to that required by Directive 1999/31/EC.
(23)
It is necessary to define when and how a waste facility servicing the extractive industries should be closed and to set out the obligations and responsibilities to be met by the operator during the after-closure period.
(24)
Member States should require operators of the extractive industries to apply monitoring and management controls in order to prevent water and soil pollution and to identify any adverse effect that their waste facilities may have on the environment or on human health. In addition, for the purposes of minimising water pollution, the discharge of waste into any receiving body of water should comply with Directive 2000/60/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 October 2000 establishing a framework for Community action in the field of water policy (12). Furthermore, concentrations in tailings ponds of cyanide and cyanide compounds from certain extractive industries should, in view of their harmful and toxic effects, be reduced to the lowest possible levels, using best available techniques. Maximum concentration thresholds should be set accordingly and, in any case, in line with the specific requirements of this Directive to prevent such effects.
(25)
The operator of a waste facility servicing the extractive industries should be required to lodge a financial guarantee or equivalent in accordance with procedures to be decided by the Member States ensuring that all the obligations flowing from the permit will be fulfilled, including those relating to the closure and after-closure of the waste facility. The financial guarantee should be sufficient to cover the cost of rehabilitation of the land affected by the waste facility, which includes the waste facility itself, as described in the waste management plan prepared pursuant to Article 5 and required by the Article 7 permit, by a suitably qualified and independent third party. It is also necessary for such a guarantee to be provided prior to the commencement of deposition operations in the waste facility and to be periodically adjusted. In addition, in accordance with the polluter pays principle and with Directive 2004/35/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 April 2004 on environmental liability with regard to the prevention and remedying of environmental damage (13), it is important to clarify that an operator of a waste facility servicing the extractive industries is subject to appropriate liability in respect of environmental damage caused by its operations or the imminent threat of such damage.
(26)
In the case of the operation of waste facilities servicing the extractive industries that are likely to have significant adverse transboundary effects on the environment and any resultant risks to human health, in the territory of another Member State, there should be a common procedure in place to facilitate consultation among neighbouring countries. This should be done with a view to ensuring that there is an adequate exchange of information between authorities and that the public are duly informed of any such waste facilities that could have adverse effects for the environment of that other Member State.
(27)
It is necessary for Member States to ensure that competent authorities organise an effective system of inspections or equivalent control measures in respect of waste facilities servicing the extractive industries. Without prejudice to the obligations of the operator under the permit, prior to the commencement of deposition operations there should be an inspection to check that the permit conditions have been complied with. In addition, Member States should ensure that operators and their successors maintain up-to-date records relating to such waste facilities and that operators transfer to their successors information concerning the state of the waste facility and its operations.
(28)
Member States should send regular reports to the Commission on the implementation of this Directive, including information on accidents or near-accidents. On the basis of those reports, the Commission should report to the European Parliament and the Council.
(29)
Member States should lay down rules on penalties for infringement of this Directive and ensure that they are implemented. Those penalties should be effective, proportionate and dissuasive.
(30)
It is necessary for Member States to ensure that an inventory of closed, including abandoned, waste facilities located on their territory is drawn up in order to identify those which cause serious negative environmental impacts or have the potential of becoming in the medium or short term a serious threat to human health or the environment. These inventories should provide a basis for an appropriate programme of measures.
(31)
The Commission should ensure an appropriate exchange of scientific and technical information on how to carry out an inventory of closed waste facilities at Member State level and on the development of methodologies to assist Member States in complying with this Directive when rehabilitating closed waste facilities. Moreover, an exchange of information should be ensured within and between Member States on the best available techniques.
(32)
With a view to the consistent application of Article 6 of the Treaty, environmental protection requirements must be integrated into the implementation of Community policies and activities with a view to promoting sustainable development.
(33)
This Directive could be a useful instrument to be taken into account when verifying that projects receiving Community funding in the context of development aid include the necessary measures to prevent or reduce as far as possible negative effects on the environment. Such an approach is consistent with Article 6 of the Treaty, particularly with regard to integrating environmental protection requirements into the Community's policy in the sphere of development cooperation.
(34)
The objective of this Directive, that is to say, improving the management of waste from the extractive industries, cannot be sufficiently achieved by the Member States acting alone because the mismanagement of such waste may cause pollution of a transboundary nature. Under the polluter pays principle it is necessary, inter alia, to take into account any damage to the environment caused by waste from the extractive industries, and different national applications of that principle may lead to substantial disparities in the financial burden on economic operators. Moreover, the existence of different national policies on the management of waste from the extractive industries hampers the aim of ensuring a minimum level of safe and responsible management of such waste and maximising its recovery throughout the Community. Therefore, since by reason of the scale and effects of this Directive, its objective can be better achieved at Community level, the Community may adopt measures, in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity, as set out in Article 5 of the Treaty. In accordance with the principle of proportionality, as set out in that Article, this Directive does not go beyond what is necessary in order to achieve this objective.
(35)
The measures necessary for the implementation of this Directive should be adopted in accordance with Council Decision 1999/468/EC of 28 June 1999 laying down the procedures for the exercise of implementing powers conferred on the Commission (14).
(36)
The operation of waste facilities existing at the moment of transposition of this Directive should be regulated in order to take the necessary measures, within a specified period of time, for their adaptation to the requirements of this Directive.
(37)
In accordance with paragraph 34 of the Interinstitutional agreement on better law‐making (15), Member States are encouraged to draw up, for themselves and in the interest of the Community, their own tables, which will, as far as possible, illustrate the correlation between this Directive and the transposition measures and to make them public,
HAVE ADOPTED THIS DIRECTIVE:
