Article 24
Take-back when a shipment is illegal
1.   Where a competent authority discovers a shipment that it considers to be an illegal shipment, it shall immediately inform the other competent authorities concerned.
2.   If an illegal shipment is the responsibility of the notifier, the competent authority of dispatch shall ensure that the waste in question is:
(a)
taken back by the notifier de facto; or, if no notification has been submitted;
(b)
taken back by the notifier de jure; or, if impracticable;
(c)
taken back by the competent authority of dispatch itself or by a natural or legal person on its behalf; or, if impracticable;
(d)
alternatively recovered or disposed of in the country of destination or dispatch by the competent authority of dispatch itself or by a natural or legal person on its behalf; or, if impracticable;
(e)
alternatively recovered or disposed of in another country by the competent authority of dispatch itself or by a natural or legal person on its behalf if all the competent authorities concerned agree.
This take-back, recovery or disposal shall take place within 30 days, or such other period as may be agreed between the competent authorities concerned after the competent authority of dispatch becomes aware of or has been advised in writing by the competent authorities of destination or transit of the illegal shipment and informed of the reason(s) therefor. Such advice may result from information submitted to the competent authorities of destination or transit, inter alia, by other competent authorities.
In cases of take-back as referred to in (a), (b) and (c), a new notification shall be submitted, unless the competent authorities concerned agree that a duly reasoned request by the initial competent authority of dispatch is sufficient.
The new notification shall be submitted by the person or authority listed in (a), (b) or (c) and in accordance with that order.
No competent authority shall oppose or object to the return of waste of an illegal shipment. In the case of alternative arrangements as referred to in (d) and (e) by the competent authority of dispatch, a new notification shall be submitted by the initial competent authority of dispatch or by a natural or legal person on its behalf unless the competent authorities concerned agree that a duly reasoned request by that authority is sufficient.
3.   If an illegal shipment is the responsibility of the consignee the competent authority of destination shall ensure that the waste in question is recovered or disposed of in an environmentally sound manner:
(a)
by the consignee; or, if impracticable,
(b)
by the competent authority itself or by a natural or legal person on its behalf.
This recovery or disposal shall take place within 30 days, or such other period as may be agreed between the competent authorities concerned after the competent authority of destination becomes aware of or has been advised in writing by the competent authorities of dispatch or transit of the illegal shipment and informed of the reason(s) therefor. Such advice may result from information submitted to the competent authorities of dispatch and transit, inter alia, by other competent authorities.
To this end, the competent authorities concerned shall cooperate, as necessary, in the recovery or disposal of the waste.
4.   If no new notification is to be submitted, a new movement document shall be completed in accordance with Article 15 or 16 by the person responsible for take-back or, if impracticable, by the initial competent authority of dispatch.
If a new notification is submitted by the initial competent authority of dispatch, a new financial guarantee or equivalent insurance shall not be required.
5.   In particular in cases where responsibility for the illegal shipment cannot be imputed to either the notifier or the consignee, the competent authorities concerned shall cooperate to ensure that the waste in question is recovered or disposed of.
6.   In the cases of interim recovery or disposal referred to in Article 6(6) where an illegal shipment is discovered after completion of the interim recovery or disposal operation, the subsidiary obligation of the country of dispatch to take the waste back or arrange for alternative recovery or disposal shall end when the facility has issued the certificate referred to in Article 15(d).
If a facility issues a certificate of recovery or disposal in such a way as to result in an illegal shipment, with the consequence that the financial guarantee is released, paragraph 3 and Article 25(2) shall apply.
7.   Where the waste of an illegal shipment is discovered within a Member State, the competent authority with jurisdiction over the area where the waste was discovered shall be responsible for ensuring that arrangements are made for the safe storage of the waste pending its return or non-interim recovery or disposal in an alternative way.
8.   Articles 34 and 36 shall not apply in cases where illegal shipments are returned to the country of dispatch and that country of dispatch is a country covered by the prohibitions set out in those Articles.
9.   In the case of an illegal shipment as defined in point 35(g) of Article 2, the person who arranges the shipment shall be subject to the same obligations established in this Article as the notifier.
10.   This Article shall be without prejudice to Community and national provisions concerning liability.
