Article 14
Pre-consented recovery facilities
1.   The competent authorities of destination which have jurisdiction over specific recovery facilities may decide to issue pre-consents to such facilities.
Such decisions shall be limited to a specific period and may be revoked at any time.
2.   In the case of a general notification submitted in accordance with Article 13, the period of validity of the consent referred to in Article 9(4) and (5) may be extended to up to three years by the competent authority of destination in agreement with the other competent authorities concerned.
3.   Competent authorities which decide to issue a pre-consent to a facility in accordance with paragraphs 1 and 2 shall inform the Commission and, where appropriate, the OECD Secretariat of:
(a)
the name, registration number and address of the recovery facility;
(b)
the description of technologies employed, including R-code(s);
(c)
the wastes as listed in Annexes IV and IVA or the wastes to which the decision applies;
(d)
the total pre-consented quantity;
(e)
the period of validity;
(f)
any change in the pre-consent;
(g)
any change in the information notified; and
(h)
any revocation of the pre-consent.
For this purpose the form set out in Annex VI shall be used.
4.   By way of derogation from Articles 9, 10 and 12, the consent given in accordance with Article 9, conditions imposed in accordance with Article 10 or objections raised in accordance with Article 12 by the competent authorities concerned shall be subject to a time limit of seven working days following the date of transmission of the acknowledgement of the competent authority of destination in accordance with Article 8.
5.   Notwithstanding paragraph 4, the competent authority of dispatch may decide that more time is needed in order to receive further information or documentation from the notifier.
In such cases, the competent authority shall, within seven working days, inform the notifier in writing with copies to the other competent authorities concerned.
The total time needed shall not exceed 30 days following the date of transmission of the acknowledgement of the competent authority of destination in accordance with Article 8.
