Article 1
Scope
1.   This Regulation establishes procedures and control regimes for the shipment of waste, depending on the origin, destination and route of the shipment, the type of waste shipped and the type of treatment to be applied to the waste at its destination.
2.   This Regulation shall apply to shipments of waste:
(a)
between Member States, within the Community or with transit through third countries;
(b)
imported into the Community from third countries;
(c)
exported from the Community to third countries;
(d)
in transit through the Community, on the way from and to third countries.
3.   The following shall be excluded from the scope of this Regulation:
(a)
the offloading to shore of waste, including waste water and residues, generated by the normal operation of ships and offshore platforms, provided that such waste is subject to the requirements of the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships, 1973, as modified by the Protocol of 1978 relating thereto (Marpol 73/78), or other binding international instruments;
(b)
waste generated on board vehicles, trains, aeroplanes and ships, until such waste is offloaded in order to be recovered or disposed of;
(c)
shipments of radioactive waste as defined in Article 2 of Council Directive 92/3/Euratom of 3 February 1992 on the supervision and control of shipments of radioactive waste between Member States and into and out of the Community (15);
(d)
shipments which are subject to the approval requirements of Regulation (EC) No 1774/2002;
(e)
shipments of the waste referred to in point 1(b)(ii), (iv) and (v) of Article 2 of Directive 2006/12/EC, where such shipments are already covered by other Community legislation containing similar provisions;
(f)
shipments of waste from the Antarctic into the Community which are in accordance with the requirements of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (1991);
(g)
imports into the Community of waste generated by armed forces or relief organisations in situations of crisis, peacemaking or peacekeeping operations where such waste is shipped, by the armed forces or relief organisations concerned or on their behalf, directly or indirectly to the country of destination. In such cases, any competent authority of transit and the competent authority of destination in the Community shall be informed in advance concerning the shipment and its destination.
4.   Shipments of waste from the Antarctic to countries outside the Community, which transit through the Community, shall be subject to Articles 36 and 49.
5.   Shipments of waste exclusively within a Member State shall be subject only to Article 33.
