Article 16
Requirements following consent to a shipment
After consent has been given to a notified shipment by the competent authorities involved, all undertakings involved shall complete the movement document, or, in the case of a general notification, the movement documents at the points indicated, sign it or them and retain a copy or copies. The following requirements shall be fulfilled:
(a)
Completion of the movement document by the notifier: once the notifier has received consent from the competent authorities of dispatch, destination and transit or, in relation to the competent authority of transit, can assume tacit consent, he/she shall insert the actual date of shipment and otherwise complete the movement document to the extent possible.
(b)
Prior information regarding actual start of shipment: the notifier shall send signed copies of the then completed movement document, as described in point (a), to the competent authorities concerned and to the consignee at least three working days before the shipment starts.
(c)
Documents to accompany each transport: the notifier shall retain a copy of the movement document. The movement document and copies of the notification document containing the written consents and the conditions of the competent authorities concerned shall accompany each transport. The movement document shall be retained by the facility which receives the waste.
(d)
Written confirmation of receipt of the waste by the facility: within three days of receipt of the waste, the facility shall provide confirmation in writing that the waste has been received.
This confirmation shall be contained in, or annexed to, the movement document.
The facility shall send signed copies of the movement document containing this confirmation to the notifier and to the competent authorities concerned.
(e)
Certificate for non-interim recovery or disposal by the facility: as soon as possible, but no later than 30 days after completion of the non-interim recovery or disposal operation, and no later than one calendar year, or a shorter period in accordance with Article 9(7), following receipt of the waste, the facility carrying out the operation shall, under its responsibility, certify that the non-interim recovery or disposal has been completed.
This certificate shall be contained in, or annexed to, the movement document.
The facility shall send signed copies of the movement document containing this certificate to the notifier and to the competent authorities concerned.
