Article 11
Objections to shipments of waste destined for disposal
1.   Where a notification is submitted regarding a planned shipment of waste destined for disposal, the competent authorities of destination and dispatch may, within 30 days following the date of transmission of the acknowledgement of the competent authority of destination in accordance with Article 8, raise reasoned objections based on one or more of the following grounds and in accordance with the Treaty:
(a)
that the planned shipment or disposal would not be in accordance with measures taken to implement the principles of proximity, priority for recovery and self-sufficiency at Community and national levels in accordance with Directive 2006/12/EC, to prohibit generally or partially or to object systematically to shipments of waste; or
(b)
that the planned shipment or disposal would not be in accordance with national legislation relating to environmental protection, public order, public safety or health protection concerning actions taking place in the objecting country; or
(c)
that the notifier or the consignee has previously been convicted of illegal shipment or some other illegal act in relation to environmental protection. In this case, the competent authorities of dispatch and destination may refuse all shipments involving the person in question in accordance with national legislation; or
(d)
that the notifier or the facility has repeatedly failed to comply with Articles 15 and 16 in connection with past shipments; or
(e)
that the Member State wishes to exercise its right pursuant to Article 4(1) of the Basel Convention to prohibit the import of hazardous waste or of waste listed in Annex II to that Convention; or
(f)
that the planned shipment or disposal conflicts with obligations resulting from international conventions concluded by the Member State(s) concerned or the Community; or
(g)
that the planned shipment or disposal is not in accordance with Directive 2006/12/EC, in particular Articles 5 and 7 thereof, while taking into account geographical circumstances or the need for specialised installations for certain types of waste:
(i)
in order to implement the principle of self-sufficiency at Community and national levels, or
(ii)
in cases where the specialised installation has to dispose of waste from a nearer source and the competent authority has given priority to this waste, or
(iii)
in order to ensure that shipments are in accordance with waste management plans, or
(h)
that the waste will be treated in a facility which is covered by Directive 96/61/EC, but which does not apply best available techniques as defined in Article 9(4) of that Directive in compliance with the permit of the facility; or
(i)
that the waste is mixed municipal waste collected from private households (waste entry 20 03 01); or
(j)
that the waste concerned will not be treated in accordance with legally binding environmental protection standards in relation to disposal operations established in Community legislation (also in cases where temporary derogations are granted).
2.   The competent authority(ies) of transit may, within the 30-day time limit referred to in paragraph 1, raise reasoned objections based only on paragraph 1(b), (c), (d) and (f).
3.   In the case of hazardous waste produced in a Member State of dispatch in such a small quantity overall per year that the provision of new specialised disposal installations within that Member State would be uneconomic, paragraph 1(a) shall not apply.
The competent authority of destination shall cooperate with the competent authority of dispatch which considers that this paragraph and not paragraph 1(a) should apply, with a view to resolving the issue bilaterally.
If there is no satisfactory solution, either Member State may refer the matter to the Commission. The Commission shall then determine the issue in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 18(3) of Directive 2006/12/EC.
4.   If, within the 30-day time limit referred to in paragraph 1, the competent authorities consider that the problems which gave rise to their objections have been resolved, they shall immediately inform the notifier in writing, with copies to the consignee and to the other competent authorities concerned.
5.   If the problems giving rise to the objections have not been resolved within the 30-day time limit referred to in paragraph 1, the notification shall cease to be valid. In cases where the notifier still intends to carry out the shipment, a new notification shall be submitted, unless all the competent authorities concerned and the notifier agree otherwise.
6.   Measures taken by Member States in accordance with paragraph 1(a), to prohibit generally or partially or to object systematically to shipments of waste destined for disposal, or in accordance with paragraph 1(e), shall immediately be notified to the Commission which shall inform the other Member States.
