Article 49
Protection of the environment
1.   The producer, the notifier and other undertakings involved in a shipment of waste and/or its recovery or disposal shall take the necessary steps to ensure that any waste they ship is managed without endangering human health and in an environmentally sound manner throughout the period of shipment and during its recovery and disposal. In particular, when the shipment takes place in the Community, the requirements of Article 4 of Directive 2006/12/EC and other Community legislation on waste shall be respected.
2.   In the case of exports from the Community, the competent authority of dispatch in the Community shall:
(a)
require and endeavour to secure that any waste exported is managed in an environmentally sound manner throughout the period of shipment, including recovery as referred to in Articles 36 and 38 or disposal as referred to in Article 34, in the third country of destination;
(b)
prohibit an export of waste to third countries if it has reason to believe that the waste will not be managed in accordance with the requirements of point (a).
Environmentally sound management may, inter alia, be assumed as regards the waste recovery or disposal operation concerned, if the notifier or the competent authority in the country of destination can demonstrate that the facility which receives the waste will be operated in accordance with human health and environmental protection standards that are broadly equivalent to standards established in Community legislation.
This assumption shall, however, be without prejudice to the overall assessment of environmentally sound management throughout the period of shipment and including recovery or disposal in the third country of destination.
For the purposes of seeking guidance on environmentally sound management, the guidelines listed in Annex VIII may be considered.
3.   In the case of imports into the Community, the competent authority of destination in the Community shall:
(a)
require and take the necessary steps to ensure that any waste shipped into its area of jurisdiction is managed without endangering human health and without using processes or methods which could harm the environment, and in accordance with Article 4 of Directive 2006/12/EC and other Community legislation on waste throughout the period of shipment, including recovery or disposal in the country of destination;
(b)
prohibit an import of waste from third countries if it has reason to believe that the waste will not be managed in accordance with the requirements of point (a).
