Article 26
Format of the communications
1.   The information and documents listed below may be submitted by post:
(a)
notification of a planned shipment pursuant to Articles 4 and 13;
(b)
request for information and documentation pursuant to Articles 4, 7 and 8;
(c)
submission of information and documentation pursuant to Articles 4, 7 and 8;
(d)
written consent to a notified shipment pursuant to Article 9;
(e)
conditions for a shipment pursuant to Article 10;
(f)
objections to a shipment pursuant to Articles 11 and 12;
(g)
information on decisions to issue pre-consents to specific recovery facilities pursuant to Article 14(3);
(h)
written confirmation of receipt of the waste pursuant to Articles 15 and 16;
(i)
certificate for recovery or disposal of the waste pursuant to Articles 15 and 16;
(j)
prior information regarding actual start of the shipment pursuant to Article 16;
(k)
information on changes in the shipment after consent pursuant to Article 17; and
(l)
written consents and movement documents to be sent pursuant to Titles IV, V and VI.
2.   Subject to the agreement of the competent authorities concerned and the notifier, the documents referred to in paragraph 1 may alternatively be submitted using any of the following methods of communication:
(a)
by fax; or
(b)
by fax followed by post; or
(c)
by e-mail with digital signature. In this case, any stamp or signature required shall be replaced by the digital signature; or
(d)
by e-mail without digital signature followed by post.
3.   The documents to accompany each transport in accordance with Article 16(c) and Article 18 may be in an electronic form with digital signatures if they can be made readable at any time during the transport and if this is acceptable to the competent authorities concerned.
4.   Subject to the agreement of the competent authorities concerned and of the notifier, the information and documents listed in paragraph 1 may be submitted and exchanged by means of electronic data interchange with electronic signature or electronic authentication in accordance with Directive 1999/93/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 December 1999 on a Community framework for electronic signatures (20), or a comparable electronic authentication system which provides the same level of security. In such cases, organisational arrangements concerning the flow of electronic data interchange may be made.
