Article 15
Additional provisions regarding interim recovery and disposal operations
Shipments of waste destined for interim recovery or disposal operations shall be subject to the following additional provisions:
(a)
Where a shipment of waste is destined for an interim recovery or disposal operation, all the facilities where subsequent interim as well as non-interim recovery and disposal operations are envisaged shall also be indicated in the notification document in addition to the initial interim recovery or disposal operation.
(b)
The competent authorities of dispatch and destination may give their consent to a shipment of waste destined for an interim recovery or disposal operation only if there are no grounds for objection, in accordance with Articles 11 or 12, to the shipment(s) of waste to the facilities performing any subsequent interim or non-interim recovery or disposal operations.
(c)
Within three days of the receipt of the waste by the facility which carries out this interim recovery or disposal operation, that facility shall provide confirmation in writing that the waste has been received.
This confirmation shall be supplied on, or annexed to, the movement document. The said facility shall send signed copies of the movement document containing this confirmation to the notifier and to the competent authorities concerned.
(d)
As soon as possible, but no later than 30 days after completion of the interim recovery or disposal operation, and no later than one calendar year, or a shorter period in accordance with Article 9(7), following the receipt of the waste, the facility carrying out this operation shall, under its responsibility, certify that the interim recovery or disposal has been completed.
This certificate shall be contained in, or annexed to, the movement document.
The said facility shall send signed copies of the movement document containing this certificate to the notifier and to the competent authorities concerned.
(e)
When a recovery or disposal facility which carries out an interim recovery or disposal operation delivers the waste for any subsequent interim or non-interim recovery or disposal operation to a facility located in the country of destination, it shall obtain as soon as possible but no later than one calendar year following delivery of the waste, or a shorter period in accordance with Article 9(7), a certificate from that facility that the subsequent non-interim recovery or disposal operation has been completed.
The said facility that carries out an interim recovery or disposal operation shall promptly transmit the relevant certificate(s) to the notifier and the competent authorities concerned, identifying the shipment(s) to which the certificate(s) pertain.
(f)
When a delivery as described in subparagraph (e) is made to a facility respectively located:
(i)
in the initial country of dispatch or in another Member State, a new notification shall be required in accordance with the provisions of this Title, or
(ii)
in a third country, a new notification shall be required in accordance with the provisions of this Regulation, with the addition that the provisions concerning the competent authorities concerned shall also apply to the initial competent authority of the initial country of dispatch.
