Article 3
Overall procedural framework
1.   Shipments of the following wastes shall be subject to the procedure of prior written notification and consent as laid down in the provisions of this Title:
(a)
if destined for disposal operations:
all wastes;
(b)
if destined for recovery operations:
(i)
wastes listed in Annex IV, which include, inter alia, wastes listed in Annexes II and VIII to the Basel Convention,
(ii)
wastes listed in Annex IVA,
(iii)
wastes not classified under one single entry in either Annex III, IIIB, IV or IVA,
(iv)
mixtures of wastes not classified under one single entry in either Annex III, IIIB, IV or IVA unless listed in Annex IIIA.
2.   Shipments of the following wastes destined for recovery shall be subject to the general information requirements laid down in Article 18, if the amount of waste shipped exceeds 20 kg:
(a)
waste listed in Annex III or IIIB;
(b)
mixtures, not classified under one single entry in Annex III, of two or more wastes listed in Annex III, provided that the composition of these mixtures does not impair their environmentally sound recovery and provided that such mixtures are listed in Annex IIIA, in accordance with Article 58.
3.   For wastes listed in Annex III, in exceptional cases, the relevant provisions shall apply as if they had been listed in Annex IV, if they display any of the hazardous characteristics listed in Annex III to Directive 91/689/EEC. These cases shall be treated in accordance with Article 58.
4.   Shipments of waste explicitly destined for laboratory analysis to assess either its physical or chemical characteristics or to determine its suitability for recovery or disposal operations shall not be subject to the procedure of prior written notification and consent as described in paragraph 1. Instead, the procedural requirements of Article 18 shall apply. The amount of such waste exempted when explicitly destined for laboratory analysis shall be determined by the minimum quantity reasonably needed to adequately perform the analysis in each particular case, and shall not exceed 25 kg.
5.   Shipments of mixed municipal waste (waste entry 20 03 01) collected from private households, including where such collection also covers such waste from other producers, to recovery or disposal facilities shall, in accordance with this Regulation, be subject to the same provisions as shipments of waste destined for disposal.
