Article 9
Consents by the competent authorities of destination, dispatch and transit and time periods for transport, recovery or disposal
1.   The competent authorities of destination, dispatch and transit shall have 30 days following the date of transmission of the acknowledgement by the competent authority of destination in accordance with Article 8 in which to take one of the following duly reasoned decisions in writing as regards the notified shipment:
(a)
consent without conditions;
(b)
consent with conditions in accordance with Article 10; or
(c)
objections in accordance with Articles 11 and 12.
Tacit consent by the competent authority of transit may be assumed if no objection is lodged within the said 30-day time limit.
2.   The competent authorities of destination, dispatch and, where appropriate, transit shall transmit their decision and the reasons therefor to the notifier in writing within the 30-day time limit referred to in paragraph 1, with copies to the other competent authorities concerned.
3.   The competent authorities of destination, dispatch and, where appropriate, transit shall signify their written consent by appropriately stamping, signing and dating the notification document or their copies thereof.
4.   A written consent to a planned shipment shall expire one calendar year after it is issued or on such later date as is indicated in the notification document. However, this shall not apply if a shorter period is indicated by the competent authorities concerned.
5.   Tacit consent to a planned shipment shall expire one calendar year after the expiry of the 30-day time limit referred to in paragraph 1.
6.   The planned shipment may take place only after fulfilment of the requirements of Article 16(a) and (b) and during the period of validity of the tacit or written consents of all competent authorities.
7.   The recovery or disposal of waste in relation to a planned shipment shall be completed no later than one calendar year from the receipt of the waste by the facility, unless a shorter period is indicated by the competent authorities concerned.
8.   The competent authorities concerned shall withdraw their consent when they have knowledge that:
(a)
the composition of the waste is not as notified; or
(b)
the conditions imposed on the shipment are not respected; or
(c)
the waste is not recovered or disposed of in compliance with the permit of the facility that performs the said operation; or
(d)
the waste is to be, or has been, shipped, recovered or disposed of in a way that is not in accordance with the information supplied on, or annexed to, the notification and movement documents.
9.   Any withdrawal of consent shall be transmitted by means of official notice to the notifier with copies to the other competent authorities concerned and to the consignee.
