Article 10
Conditions for a shipment
1.   The competent authorities of dispatch, destination and transit may, within 30 days following the date of transmission of the acknowledgement of the competent authority of destination in accordance with Article 8, lay down conditions in connection with their consent to a notified shipment. Such conditions may be based on one or more of the reasons specified in either Article 11 or Article 12.
2.   The competent authorities of dispatch, destination and transit may also, within the 30-day time limit referred to in paragraph 1, lay down conditions in respect of the transport of waste within their jurisdiction. Such transport conditions shall not be more stringent than those laid down in respect of similar shipments occurring wholly within their jurisdiction and shall take due account of existing agreements, in particular relevant international agreements.
3.   The competent authorities of dispatch, destination and transit may also, within the 30-day time limit referred to in paragraph 1, lay down a condition that their consent is to be considered withdrawn if the financial guarantee or equivalent insurance is not applicable at the latest when the notified shipment starts, as required by Article 6(3).
4.   Conditions shall be transmitted to the notifier in writing by the competent authority that lays them down, with copies to the competent authorities concerned.
Conditions shall be supplied on, or annexed to, the notification document by the relevant competent authority.
5.   The competent authority of destination may also, within the 30-day time limit referred to in paragraph 1, lay down a condition that the facility which receives the waste shall keep a regular record of inputs, outputs and/or balances for wastes and the related recovery or disposal operations as contained in the notification, and for the period of validity of the notification. Such records shall be signed by a person legally responsible for the facility and be sent to the competent authority of destination within one month of completion of the notified recovery or disposal operation.
