Article 37
Procedures when exporting waste listed in Annex III or IIIA
1.   In the case of waste which is listed in Annex III or IIIA and the export of which is not prohibited under Article 36, the Commission shall, within 20 days of the entry into force of this Regulation, send a written request to each country to which the OECD Decision does not apply, seeking:
(i)
confirmation in writing that the waste may be exported from the Community for recovery in that country, and
(ii)
an indication as to which control procedure, if any, would be followed in the country of destination.
Each country to which the OECD Decision does not apply shall be given the following options:
(a)
a prohibition; or
(b)
a procedure of prior written notification and consent as described in Article 35; or
(c)
no control in the country of destination.
2.   Before the date of application of this Regulation, the Commission shall adopt a Regulation taking into account all replies received pursuant to paragraph 1 and shall inform the Committee established pursuant to Article 18 of Directive 2006/12/EC.
If a country has not issued a confirmation as referred to in paragraph 1 or if a country for any reason has not been contacted, paragraph 1(b) shall apply.
The Commission shall periodically update the Regulation adopted.
3.   If a country indicates in its reply that certain shipments of waste are not subject to any control, Article 18 shall apply mutatis mutandis to such shipments.
4.   Where waste is exported, it shall be destined for recovery operations within a facility which, under applicable national law, is operating or is authorised to operate in the country of destination.
5.   In the case of a shipment of waste not classified under one single entry in Annex III or a shipment of mixtures of wastes not classified under one single entry in Annex III or IIIA or a shipment of waste classified in Annex IIIB, and provided that the export is not prohibited pursuant to Article 36, paragraph 1(b) of this Article shall apply.
