Article 41
Imports prohibited except from a country Party to the Basel Convention or with an agreement in place or from other areas during situations of crisis or war
1.   Imports into the Community of waste destined for disposal shall be prohibited except those from:
(a)
countries which are Parties to the Basel Convention; or
(b)
other countries with which the Community, or the Community and its Member States, have concluded bilateral or multilateral agreements or arrangements compatible with Community legislation and in accordance with Article 11 of the Basel Convention; or
(c)
other countries with which individual Member States have concluded bilateral agreements or arrangements in accordance with paragraph 2; or
(d)
other areas in cases where, on exceptional grounds during situations of crisis, peacemaking, peacekeeping or war, no bilateral agreements or arrangements pursuant to points (b) or (c) can be concluded or where a competent authority in the country of dispatch has either not been designated or is unable to act.
2.   In exceptional cases, individual Member States may conclude bilateral agreements and arrangements for the disposal of specific waste in those Member States, where such waste will not be managed in an environmentally sound manner, as referred to in Article 49, in the country of dispatch.
These agreements and arrangements shall be compatible with Community legislation and in accordance with Article 11 of the Basel Convention.
These agreements and arrangements shall guarantee that the disposal operations will be carried out in an authorised facility and will comply with the requirements for environmentally sound management.
These agreements and arrangements shall also guarantee that the waste is produced in the country of dispatch and that disposal will be carried out exclusively in the Member State which has concluded the agreement or arrangement.
These agreements or arrangements shall be notified to the Commission prior to their conclusion. However, in emergency situations they may be notified up to one month after conclusion.
3.   Bilateral or multilateral agreements or arrangements entered into in accordance with paragraph 1(b) and (c) shall be based upon the procedural requirements of Article 42.
4.   The countries referred to in paragraph 1(a), (b) and (c) shall be required to present a prior duly reasoned request to the competent authority of the Member State of destination on the basis that they do not have and cannot reasonably acquire the technical capacity and the necessary facilities in order to dispose of the waste in an environmentally sound manner.
