Article 4
Notification
Where the notifier intends to ship waste as referred to in Article 3(1)(a) or (b), he/she shall submit a prior written notification to and through the competent authority of dispatch and, if submitting a general notification, comply with Article 13.
When a notification is submitted, the following requirements shall be fulfilled:
1.
notification and movement documents:
Notification shall be effected by means of the following documents:
(a)
the notification document set out in Annex IA; and
(b)
the movement document set out in Annex IB.
In submitting a notification, the notifier shall fill in the notification document and, where relevant, the movement document.
When the notifier is not the original producer in accordance with point 15(a)(i) of Article 2, the notifier shall ensure that this producer or one of the persons indicated in point 15(a)(ii) or (iii) of Article 2, where practicable, also signs the notification document set out in Annex IA.
The notification document and the movement document shall be issued to the notifier by the competent authority of dispatch;
2.
information and documentation in the notification and movement documents:
The notifier shall supply on, or annex to, the notification document information and documentation as listed in Annex II, Part 1. The notifier shall supply on, or annex to, the movement document information and documentation referred to in Annex II, Part 2, to the extent possible at the time of notification.
A notification shall be considered properly carried out when the competent authority of dispatch is satisfied that the notification document and movement document have been completed in accordance with the first subparagraph;
3.
additional information and documentation:
If requested by any of the competent authorities concerned, the notifier shall supply additional information and documentation. A list of additional information and documentation that may be requested is set out in Annex II, Part 3.
A notification shall be considered properly completed when the competent authority of destination is satisfied that the notification document and the movement document have been completed and that the information and documentation as listed in Annex II, Parts 1 and 2, as well as any additional information and documentation requested in accordance with this paragraph and as listed in Annex II, Part 3, have been supplied by the notifier;
4.
conclusion of a contract between the notifier and the consignee:
The notifier shall conclude a contract as described in Article 5 with the consignee for the recovery or disposal of the notified waste.
Evidence of this contract or a declaration certifying its existence in accordance with Annex IA shall be supplied to the competent authorities involved at the time of notification. A copy of the contract or such evidence to the satisfaction of the competent authority concerned shall be provided by the notifier or consignee upon request by the competent authority;
5.
establishment of a financial guarantee or equivalent insurance:
A financial guarantee or equivalent insurance shall be established as described in Article 6. A declaration to this effect shall be made by the notifier through completion of the appropriate part of the notification document set out in Annex IA.
The financial guarantee or equivalent insurance (or if the competent authority so allows, evidence of that guarantee or insurance or a declaration certifying its existence) shall be supplied as part of the notification document at the time of notification or, if the competent authority so allows, pursuant to national legislation, at such time before the shipment starts;
6.
Coverage of the notification:
A notification shall cover the shipment of waste from its initial place of dispatch and including its interim and non-interim recovery or disposal.
If subsequent interim or non-interim operations take place in a country other than the first country of destination, the non-interim operation and its destination shall be indicated in the notification and Article 15(f) shall apply.
Only one waste identification code shall be covered for each notification, except for:
(a)
wastes not classified under one single entry in either Annex III, IIIB, IV or IVA. In this case, only one type of waste shall be specified;
(b)
mixtures of wastes not classified under one single entry in either Annex III, IIIB, IV or IVA unless listed in Annex IIIA. In this case, the code for each fraction of the waste shall be specified in order of importance.
