Article 28
Other provisions on renewable energy in the transport sector
1.   With a view to minimising the risk of single consignments being claimed more than once in the Union, Member States and the Commission shall strengthen cooperation among national systems and between national systems and voluntary schemes and verifiers established pursuant to Article 30, including, where appropriate, the exchange of data. Where the competent authority of one Member State suspects or detects a fraud, it shall, where appropriate, inform the other Member States.
2.   The Commission shall ensure that a Union database is put in place to enable the tracing of liquid and gaseous transport fuels that are eligible for being counted towards the numerator referred to in point (b) of Article 27(1) or that are taken into account for the purposes referred to in points (a), (b), and (c) of the first subparagraph of Article 29(1). Member States shall require the relevant economic operators to enter into that database information on the transactions made and the sustainability characteristics of those fuels, including their life-cycle greenhouse gas emissions, starting from their point of production to the fuel supplier that places the fuel on the market. A Member State may set up a national database that is linked to the Union database ensuring that information entered is instantly transferred between the databases.
Fuel suppliers shall enter the information necessary to verify compliance with the requirements laid down in the first and fourth subparagraphs of Article 25(1) into the relevant database.
3.   By 31 December 2021, Member States shall take measures to ensure the availability of fuels from renewable sources for transport including with regard to publicly accessible high-power recharging points and other refuelling infrastructure as provided for in their national policy frameworks in accordance with Directive 2014/94/EU.
4.   Member States shall have access to the Union database referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article. They shall take measures to ensure that economic operators enter accurate information into the relevant database. The Commission shall require the schemes that are the subject of a decision pursuant to Article 30(4) of this Directive to verify compliance with that requirement when checking compliance with the sustainability criteria for biofuels, bioliquids and biomass fuels. It shall publish, every two years, aggregated information from the Union database pursuant to Annex VIII to Regulation (EU) 2018/1999.
5.   By 31 December 2021, the Commission shall adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 35 to supplement this Directive by specifying the methodology to determine the share of biofuel, and biogas for transport, resulting from biomass being processed with fossil fuels in a common process, and by specifying the methodology for assessing greenhouse gas emissions savings from renewable liquid and gaseous transport fuels of non-biological origin and from recycled carbon fuels, which shall ensure that credit for avoided emissions is not given for CO2 the capture of which has already received an emission credit under other provisions of law.
6.   By 25 June 2019 and every two years thereafter, the Commission shall review the list of feedstock set out in Parts A and B of Annex IX with a view to adding feedstock in accordance with the principles set out in the third subparagraph.
The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 35 to amend the list of feedstock set out in Parts A and B of Annex IX by adding, but not removing, feedstock. Feedstock that can be processed only with advanced technologies shall be added to Part A of Annex IX. Feedstock that can be processed into biofuels, or biogas for transport, with mature technologies shall be added to Part B of Annex IX.
Such delegated acts shall be based on an analysis of the potential of the raw material as feedstock for the production of biofuels and biogas for transport, taking into account all of the following:
(a)
the principles of the circular economy and of the waste hierarchy established in Directive 2008/98/EC;
(b)
the Union sustainability criteria laid down in Article 29(2) to (7);
(c)
the need to avoid significant distortive effects on markets for (by-)products, wastes or residues;
(d)
the potential for delivering substantial greenhouse gas emissions savings compared to fossil fuels based on a life-cycle assessment of emissions;
(e)
the need to avoid negative impacts on the environment and biodiversity;
(f)
the need to avoid creating an additional demand for land.
7.   By 31 December 2025, in the context of the biennial assessment of progress made pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2018/1999, the Commission shall assess whether the obligation relating to advanced biofuels and biogas produced from feedstock listed in Part A of Annex IX laid down in the fourth subparagraph of Article 25(1) effectively stimulates innovation and ensures greenhouse gas emissions savings in the transport sector. The Commission shall analyse in that assessment whether the application of this Article effectively avoids double accounting of renewable energy.
The Commission shall, if appropriate, submit a proposal to amend the obligation relating to advanced biofuels and biogas produced from feedstock listed in Part A of Annex IX laid down in the fourth subparagraph of Article 25(1).
