Article 5
Opening of support schemes for electricity from renewable sources
1.   Member States shall have the right, in accordance with Articles 7 to 13 of this Directive, to decide to which extent they support electricity from renewable sources which is produced in another Member State. However, Member States may open participation in support schemes for electricity from renewable sources to producers located in other Member States, subject to the conditions laid down in this Article.
When opening participation in support schemes for electricity from renewable sources, Member States may provide that support for an indicative share of the newly-supported capacity, or of the budget allocated thereto, in each year is open to producers located in other Member States.
Such indicative shares may, in each year, amount to at least 5 % from 2023 to 2026 and at least 10 % from 2027 to 2030, or, where lower, to the level of interconnectivity of the Member State concerned in any given year.
In order to acquire further implementation experience, Member States may organise one or more pilot schemes where support is open to producers located in other Member States.
2.   Member States may require proof of physical import of electricity from renewable sources. To that end, Member States may limit participation in their support schemes to producers located in Member States with which there is a direct connection via interconnectors. However, Member States shall not change or otherwise affect cross-zonal schedules and capacity allocation due to producers participating in cross-border support schemes. Cross-border electricity transfers shall be determined only by the outcome of capacity allocation pursuant to Union law on the internal market in electricity.
3.   If a Member State decides to open participation in support schemes to producers located in other Member States, the relevant Member States shall agree on the principles of such participation. Such agreements shall cover at least the principles of allocation of renewable electricity that is the subject of cross-border support.
4.   The Commission shall, upon the request of the relevant Member States, assist them throughout the negotiation process with the setting up of cooperation arrangements by providing information and analysis, including quantitative and qualitative data on the direct and indirect costs and benefits of cooperation, as well as with guidance and technical expertise. The Commission may encourage or facilitate the exchange of best practices and may develop templates for cooperation agreements in order to facilitate the negotiation process. The Commission shall assess, by 2025, the costs and benefits of the deployment of electricity from renewable sources in the Union pursuant to this Article.
5.   By 2023, the Commission shall carry out an evaluation of the implementation of this Article. That evaluation shall assess the need to introduce an obligation on Member States partially to open participation in their support schemes for electricity from renewable sources to producers located in other Member States with a view to a 5 % opening by 2025 and a 10 % opening by 2030.
