Article 7
Calculation of the share of energy from renewable sources
1.   The gross final consumption of energy from renewable sources in each Member State shall be calculated as the sum of:
(a)
gross final consumption of electricity from renewable sources;
(b)
gross final consumption of energy from renewable sources in the heating and cooling sector; and
(c)
final consumption of energy from renewable sources in the transport sector.
With regard to point (a), (b), or (c) of the first subparagraph, gas, electricity and hydrogen from renewable sources shall be considered only once for the purposes of calculating the share of gross final consumption of energy from renewable sources.
Subject to the second subparagraph of Article 29(1), biofuels, bioliquids and biomass fuels that do not fulfil the sustainability and greenhouse gas emissions saving criteria laid down in Article 29(2) to (7) and (10) shall not be taken into account.
2.   For the purposes of point (a) of the first subparagraph of paragraph 1, gross final consumption of electricity from renewable sources shall be calculated as the quantity of electricity produced in a Member State from renewable sources, including the production of electricity from renewables self-consumers and renewable energy communities and excluding the production of electricity in pumped storage units from water that has previously been pumped uphill.
In multi-fuel plants using renewable and non-renewable sources, only the part of electricity produced from renewable sources shall be taken into account. For the purposes of that calculation, the contribution of each energy source shall be calculated on the basis of its energy content.
The electricity generated by hydropower and wind power shall be accounted for in accordance with the normalisation rules set out in Annex II.
3.   For the purposes of point (b) of the first subparagraph of paragraph 1, gross final consumption of energy from renewable sources in the heating and cooling sector shall be calculated as the quantity of district heating and cooling produced in a Member State from renewable sources, plus the consumption of other energy from renewable sources in industry, households, services, agriculture, forestry and fisheries, for heating, cooling and processing purposes.
In multi-fuel plants using renewable and non-renewable sources, only the part of heating and cooling produced from renewable sources shall be taken into account. For the purposes of that calculation, the contribution of each energy source shall be calculated on the basis of its energy content.
Ambient and geothermal energy used for heating and cooling by means of heat pumps and district cooling systems shall be taken into account for the purposes of point (b) of the first subparagraph of paragraph 1, provided that the final energy output significantly exceeds the primary energy input required to drive the heat pumps. The quantity of heat or cold to be considered to be energy from renewable sources for the purposes of this Directive shall be calculated in accordance with the methodology set out in Annex VII and shall take into account energy use in all end-use sectors.
Thermal energy generated by passive energy systems, under which lower energy consumption is achieved passively through building design or from heat generated by energy from non-renewable sources, shall not be taken into account for the purposes of point (b) of the first subparagraph of paragraph 1.
By 31 December 2021, the Commission shall adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 35 to supplement this Directive by establishing a methodology for calculating the quantity of renewable energy used for cooling and district cooling and to amend Annex VII.
That methodology shall include minimum seasonal performance factors for heat pumps operating in reverse mode.
4.   For the purposes of point (c) of the first subparagraph of paragraph 1, the following requirements shall apply:
(a)
Final consumption of energy from renewable sources in the transport sector shall be calculated as the sum of all biofuels, biomass fuels and renewable liquid and gaseous transport fuels of non-biological origin consumed in the transport sector. However, renewable liquid and gaseous transport fuels of non-biological origin that are produced from renewable electricity shall be considered to be part of the calculation pursuant to point (a) of the first subparagraph of paragraph 1 only when calculating the quantity of electricity produced in a Member State from renewable sources.
(b)
For the calculation of final consumption of energy in the transport sector, the values regarding the energy content of transport fuels, as set out in Annex III, shall be used. For the determination of the energy content of transport fuels not included in Annex III, Member States shall use the relevant European Standards Organisation (ESO) standards in order to determine the calorific values of fuels. Where no ESO standard has been adopted for that purpose, Member States shall use the relevant International Organization for Standardisation (ISO) standards.
5.   The share of energy from renewable sources shall be calculated as the gross final consumption of energy from renewable sources divided by the gross final consumption of energy from all energy sources, expressed as a percentage.
For the purposes of the first subparagraph of this paragraph, the sum referred to in the first subparagraph of paragraph 1 of this Article shall be adjusted in accordance with Articles 8, 10, 12 and 13.
In calculating a Member State's gross final consumption of energy for the purposes of measuring its compliance with the targets and indicative trajectory laid down in this Directive, the amount of energy consumed in aviation shall, as a proportion of that Member State's gross final consumption of energy, be considered to be no more than 6,18 %. For Cyprus and Malta the amount of energy consumed in aviation shall, as a proportion of those Member States' gross final consumption of energy, be considered to be no more than 4,12 %.
6.   The methodology and definitions used in the calculation of the share of energy from renewable sources shall be those provided for in Regulation (EC) No 1099/2008.
Member States shall ensure coherence of the statistical information used in calculating those sectoral and overall shares and of the statistical information reported to the Commission pursuant to that Regulation.
