Article 2
Definitions
For the purpose of this Regulation, the following definitions shall apply:
1.
‘innovation’ means the process, including its outcome, by which new ideas respond to societal or economic demand and generate new products, services or business and organisational models that are successfully introduced into an existing market or that are able to create new markets;
2.
‘Knowledge and Innovation Community’ (KIC) means an autonomous partnership of higher education institutions, research organisations, companies and other stakeholders in the innovation process in the form of a strategic network based on joint mid- to long-term innovation planning to achieve the EIT challenges, regardless of its precise legal form;
3.
‘participating State’ means either a Member State of the European Union or another country having an agreement with the Community on the EIT;
4.
‘third country’ means any State which is not a participating State;
5.
‘partner organisation’ means any organisation which is a member of a KIC and may include in particular: higher education institutions, research organisations, public or private companies, financial institutions, regional and local authorities, foundations;
6.
‘research organisation’ means any public or private legal entity which undertakes research or technological development as one of its main objectives;
7.
‘higher education institution’ means a university or any type of higher education institution which, in accordance with national legislation or practice, offers degrees and diplomas at masters or doctoral level, irrespective of its denomination in the national context;
8.
‘degrees and diplomas’ means qualifications resulting in masters or doctorates awarded by participating higher education institutions in the context of higher education activities undertaken in a KIC;
9.
‘Strategic Innovation Agenda’ (SIA) means a policy document outlining the priority fields of the EIT for future initiatives, including an overview of the planned higher education, research and innovation activities, for a period of seven years.
