Article 13
Transparency and access to documents
1.   The EIT shall ensure that its activities are conducted with a high level of transparency. In particular, the EIT shall set up an accessible, free website providing information about the activities of the EIT and individual KICs.
2.   The EIT shall make public its rules of procedure, its specific financial rules referred to in Article 21(1) and the detailed criteria for the selection of the KICs referred to in Article 7 before the first call of proposals for the selection of the first KICs.
3.   The EIT shall make public without delay its rolling triennial work programme and annual activity report referred to in Article 15.
4.   Without prejudice to paragraphs 5 and 6, the EIT shall not divulge to third parties confidential information it has received for which confidential treatment has been requested and is justified.
5.   The members of the EIT bodies shall be subject to the confidentiality requirement referred to in Article 287 of the Treaty.
The information gathered by the EIT in accordance with this Regulation shall be subject to Regulation (EC) No 45/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 December 2000 on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data by the Community institutions and bodies and on the free movement of such data (9).
6.   Regulation (EC) No 1049/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 May 2001 regarding public access to European Parliament, Council and Commission documents (10) shall apply to the documents held by the EIT. The Governing Board shall adopt practical arrangements for applying that Regulation no later than six months after the EIT has been set up.
7.   Official documents and publications of the EIT shall be translated in accordance with the Regulation No 1 of 15 April 1958 determining the languages to be used by the European Economic Community (11). The required translation services shall be provided by the Translation Centre for bodies of the European Union, set up by Council Regulation (EC) No 2965/1994 (12).
