Article 7
Selection of KICs
1.   A partnership shall be selected and designated by the EIT to become a KIC on the basis of a competitive, open and transparent procedure. Detailed criteria for the selection of the KICs, based on the principles of excellence and innovation relevance, shall be adopted and published by the EIT; external and independent experts shall be involved in the selection process.
2.   In accordance with the principles enshrined in paragraph 1, the selection of a KIC shall take particular account of:
(a)
the current and potential innovation capacity within the partnership as well as its excellence in higher education, research and innovation;
(b)
the partnership’s capacity to achieve the goals of the SIA;
(c)
the partnership’s capacity to ensure sustainable and long-term self-supporting financing including a substantial and increasing contribution from the private sector, industry and services;
(d)
the participation in the partnership of organisations active in the knowledge triangle of higher education, research and innovation;
(e)
the demonstration of a plan for the management of intellectual property appropriate to the sector concerned and consistent with the EIT principles and guidelines for the management of intellectual property, including the way in which contributions from the various partner organisations have been taken into account;
(f)
measures to support the involvement of and cooperation with the private sector, including the financial sector and in particular SMEs, as well as the creation of start-ups, spin-offs and SMEs, in view of the commercial exploitation of the results of the activities of KICs;
(g)
readiness to interact with other organisations and networks outside the KIC with the aim of sharing good practices and excellence.
3.   The minimum condition to form a KIC is the participation of at least three partner organisations, established in at least two different Member States. All these partner organisations must be independent of each other, within the meaning of Article 6 of Regulation (EC) No 1906/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 December 2006 laying down the rules for the participation of undertakings, research centres and universities in actions under the Seventh Framework Programme and for the dissemination of research results (2007-2013) (8).
4.   A KIC may include partner organisations from third countries, subject to the approval of the Governing Board. The majority of the partner organisations forming a KIC shall be established in the Member States. At least one higher education institution and one private company shall be part of each KIC.
