Article 63
Product intervention powers of competent authorities
1.   Competent authorities may prohibit or restrict in or from its Member State the marketing or distribution of a PEPP under the following conditions:
(a)
the competent authorities are satisfied that there are reasonable grounds to believe that the PEPP gives rise to significant or reiterated saver’s protection concerns or poses a risk to the orderly functioning and integrity of financial markets or the stability of whole or part of the financial system within at least one Member State;
(b)
the action is proportionate taking into account the nature of the risks identified, the level of sophistication of PEPP savers concerned and the likely effect of the action on PEPP savers who have concluded a PEPP contract;
(c)
the competent authorities have properly consulted competent authorities in other Member States that may be significantly affected by the action; and
(d)
the action does not have a discriminatory effect on services or activities provided from another Member State.
Where the conditions set out in the first subparagraph are fulfilled, competent authorities may impose the prohibition or restriction on a precautionary basis before a PEPP has been marketed or distributed to PEPP savers. A prohibition or restriction may apply in circumstances, or be subject to exceptions, specified by the competent authorities.
2.   The competent authorities shall not impose a prohibition or restriction under this Article unless, not less than one month before the measure is intended to take effect, they have notified all other competent authorities involved and EIOPA in writing or through another medium agreed between the authorities of the details of:
(a)
the PEPP to which the proposed action relates;
(b)
the precise nature of the proposed prohibition or restriction and when it is intended to take effect; and
(c)
the evidence upon which they have based their decision and upon which they have reasonable grounds to believe that each of the conditions in paragraph 1 are met.
3.   In exceptional cases where the competent authorities deem it necessary to take urgent action under this Article in order to prevent detriment arising from the PEPP, the competent authorities may take action on a provisional basis with no less than 24 hours’ written notice before the measure is intended to take effect to all other competent authorities and EIOPA, provided that all the conditions set out in this Article are met and that, in addition, it is clearly established that a one-month notification period would not adequately address the specific concern or threat. The competent authorities shall not take action on a provisional basis for a period exceeding three months.
4.   The competent authorities shall publish on their websites notice of any decision to impose any prohibition or restriction referred to in paragraph 1. That notice shall specify details of the prohibition or restriction, a time after the publication of the notice from which the measures will take effect and the evidence upon which it is satisfied each of the conditions in paragraph 1 are met. The prohibition or restriction shall only apply in relation to action taken after the publication of the notice.
5.   The competent authorities shall revoke a prohibition or restriction if the conditions in paragraph 1 no longer apply.
