Article 16
Powers of the competent authorities of the host Member State
1.   Where the competent authorities of the host Member State have reason to consider that a PEPP is distributed within its territory or a sub-account for that Member State has been opened in infringement of any obligations resulting from the applicable rules, as referred to in Article 3, they shall refer their findings to the competent authorities of the home Member State of the PEPP provider or the PEPP distributor.
2.   After assessing the information received pursuant to paragraph 1, the competent authorities of the home Member State shall, where applicable, take appropriate measures without delay to remedy the situation. They shall inform the competent authorities of the host Member State of any such measures.
3.   Where the measures taken by the competent authorities of the home Member State prove to be inadequate or are lacking, and the PEPP provider or the PEPP distributor continues to distribute the PEPP in a manner that is clearly detrimental to the interests of the host Member State’s PEPP savers or to the orderly functioning of the market for personal pension products in that Member State, the competent authorities of the host Member State may, after informing the competent authorities of the home Member State, take appropriate measures to prevent further irregularities, including, in so far as is strictly necessary, preventing the PEPP provider or the PEPP distributor from continuing the distribution of PEPPs within their territory.
In addition, the competent authorities of the home Member State or the competent authorities of the host Member State may refer the matter to EIOPA and request its assistance in accordance with Article 19 of Regulation (EU) No 1094/2010.
4.   Paragraphs 1 to 3 shall not affect the power of the host Member State to take appropriate and non-discriminatory measures to prevent or penalise irregularities committed within its territory, in situations where immediate action is strictly necessary in order to protect the rights of consumers in the host Member State, and where equivalent measures of the home Member State are inadequate or lacking, or in cases where the irregularities are contrary to national legal provisions protecting the general good, in so far as strictly necessary. In such situations, host Member States shall have the possibility of preventing the PEPP provider or the PEPP distributor from carrying on new business within their territory.
5.   Any measure adopted by the competent authorities of the host Member State under this Article shall be communicated to the PEPP provider or the PEPP distributor in a well-reasoned document and notified to the competent authorities of the home Member State without undue delay.

SECTION II



Portability


