Article 69
Publication of administrative penalties and other measures
1.   Competent authorities shall publish without undue delay on their official websites any decision imposing an administrative penalty or other measure for infringement of this Regulation after the addressee of the administrative penalty or other measure has been notified of that decision.
2.   The publication referred to in paragraph 1 shall include information on the type and nature of the infringement and the identity of the persons responsible and the administrative penalties or other measures imposed.
3.   Where the publication of the identity, in the case of legal persons, or the identity and personal data, in the case of natural persons, is considered by the competent authorities to be disproportionate following a case-by-case assessment, or where the competent authorities consider that the publication jeopardises the stability of financial markets or an on-going investigation, competent authorities shall either:
(a)
defer the publication of the decision imposing the administrative penalty or other measure until the reasons for non-publication cease to exist;
(b)
publish the decision imposing the administrative penalty or other measure, omitting for a reasonable period of time the identity and personal data of the addressee, if it is envisaged that within that period the reasons for anonymous publication shall cease to exist and provided that such anonymous publication ensures an effective protection of the personal data concerned; or
(c)
not publish at all the decision to impose the administrative penalty or other measure in the event that the options set out in points (a) and (b) are considered to be insufficient to ensure:
(i)
that the stability of financial markets would not be put in jeopardy;
(ii)
the proportionality of the publication of such decisions with regard to measures which are deemed to be of a minor nature.
4.   In the case of a decision to publish an administrative penalty or other measure on an anonymous basis as referred to in point (b) of paragraph 3, the publication of the relevant data may be postponed. Where a decision imposing an administrative penalty or other measure is subject to an appeal before the relevant judicial authorities, competent authorities shall also without delay add that information to their official website and any subsequent information on the outcome of such appeal. Any judicial decision annulling a decision imposing an administrative penalty or other measure shall also be published.
5.   Competent authorities shall ensure that any publication referred to in paragraphs 1 to 4 shall remain on their official website for at least five years after its publication. Personal data contained in the publication shall only be kept on the official websites of the competent authorities for the period which is necessary in accordance with the applicable data protection rules.
