Article 20
Opening of a new sub-account
1.   Without delay after being informed about the PEPP saver’s change of residence to another Member State, the PEPP provider shall inform the PEPP saver about the possibility to open a new sub-account within the PEPP saver’s PEPP account and about the timeframe within which such a sub-account could be opened.
In that case, the PEPP provider shall provide the PEPP saver free of charge with the PEPP KID, containing the specific requirements referred to in point (g) of Article 28(3) for the sub-account corresponding to the new Member State of residence of the PEPP saver.
In the case that a new sub-account is not available, the PEPP provider shall inform the PEPP saver about the right to switch without delay and free of charge and of the possibility to continue saving in the last sub-account opened.
2.   If the PEPP saver intends to make use of the possibility to open a sub-account, the PEPP saver shall inform the PEPP provider of the following:
(a)
the PEPP saver’s new Member State of residence;
(b)
the date from which the contributions shall be directed to the new sub-account;
(c)
any relevant information about other conditions for the PEPP.
3.   The PEPP saver may continue contributing to the last sub-account opened.
4.   The PEPP provider shall offer to provide the PEPP saver with a personalised recommendation explaining whether the opening of a new sub-account within the PEPP saver’s PEPP account and making contributions to the new sub-account would be more favourable than continuing to contribute to the last sub-account opened.
5.   Where the PEPP provider is not able to ensure the opening of a new sub-account corresponding to the PEPP saver’s new Member State of residence, the PEPP saver shall according to his or her choice be able to:
(a)
switch PEPP provider without delay and free of charge notwithstanding the requirements of Article 52(3) on the frequency of switching; or
(b)
continue contributing to the last sub-account opened.
6.   The new sub-account shall be opened by amending the existing PEPP contract between the PEPP saver and the PEPP provider, in compliance with the applicable contract law. The date of opening shall be defined in the contract.
