Article 15
Exercise of the freedom to provide services by IORPs and EU AIFM
1.   PEPP providers as referred to in points (c) and (f) of Article 6(1) which intend to provide PEPPs to PEPP savers within the territory of a host Member State for the first time under the freedom to provide services and after notifying their intention to open a sub-account for this host Member State in accordance with Article 21, shall communicate the following information to the competent authorities of their home Member State:
(a)
the name and address of the PEPP provider;
(b)
the Member State in which the PEPP provider intends to provide or distribute PEPPs to PEPP savers.
2.   The competent authorities of the home Member State shall transmit the information within 10 working days of the date of receipt to the host Member State together with a confirmation that the PEPP provider referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article complies with the requirements set out in Article 6(1). The information is communicated to the competent authorities of the host Member State unless the competent authorities of the home Member State have reason to doubt the adequacy of the administrative structure in relation to the provision of PEPP or the financial situation of the PEPP provider as referred to in points (c) and (f) of Article 6(1).
Where the competent authorities of the home Member State refuse to communicate the information to the competent authorities of the host Member State, they shall give reasons for such refusal to the PEPP provider concerned within one month of receiving all the information and documents. The refusal or any failure to reply shall be subject to the right to appeal to the courts in the PEPP provider’s home Member State.
3.   The competent authorities of the host Member State shall within 10 working days acknowledge receipt of the information referred to in paragraph 1. The competent authorities of the home Member State shall then inform the PEPP provider that the information has been received by the competent authorities of the host Member State and that the PEPP provider can start the provision of PEPP to PEPP savers in that Member State.
4.   In the absence of acknowledgment of receipt as referred to in paragraph 3 within 10 working days of the date of the transmission of the information as referred to in paragraph 2, the competent authorities of the home Member State shall inform the PEPP provider that the PEPP provider can start providing services in that host Member State.
5.   In the event of a change in any of the information referred to in paragraph 1, the PEPP provider shall notify that change to the competent authorities of the home Member State at least one month before implementing the change. The competent authorities of the home Member State shall inform the competent authorities of the host Member State about the change as soon as possible and no later than one month from receipt of the notification.
6.   Host Member States may, for the purposes of this procedure, designate other competent authorities than those referred to in point 18 of Article 2 in order to exercise the powers conferred on the competent authorities of the host Member State. They shall inform the Commission and EIOPA, indicating any division of those duties.
