Article 45
The Basic PEPP
1.   The Basic PEPP shall be a safe product representing the default investment option. It shall be designed by PEPP providers on the basis of a guarantee on the capital which shall be due at the start of the decumulation phase and during the decumulation phase, where applicable, or a risk-mitigation technique consistent with the objective to allow the PEPP saver to recoup the capital.
2.   The costs and fees for the Basic PEPP shall not exceed 1 % of the accumulated capital per year.
3.   In order to ensure a level playing field between different PEPP providers and different types of PEPPs, EIOPA shall develop draft regulatory technical standards specifying the types of costs and fees referred to in paragraph 2, having consulted the other ESAs where applicable.
When developing the draft regulatory technical standards, EIOPA shall take into account the various possible types of PEPPs, the long-term retirement nature of the PEPP and the various possible features of the PEPPs, in particular out-payments in the form of long-term annuities or annual drawdowns until at least the age corresponding with the average life expectancy of the PEPP saver. EIOPA shall also assess the peculiar nature of the capital protection with specific regard to the capital guarantee. EIOPA shall submit those draft regulatory technical standards to the Commission by 15 August 2020.
Power is delegated to the Commission to supplement this Regulation by adopting the regulatory technical standards referred to in the first subparagraph in accordance with Articles 10 to 14 of Regulation (EU) No 1094/2010.
4.   Every two years from the date of application of this Regulation, the Commission shall, after having consulted EIOPA and, where applicable, the other ESAs, review the adequacy of the percentage value referred to in paragraph 2. The Commission shall, in particular take into account the actual level and changes in the actual level of costs and fees and the impact on the availability of PEPPs.
The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 72 to amend the percentage value referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article in the light of its reviews with a view to allowing appropriate market access for PEPP providers.
