Article 16
Implementation of the Programme
1.   The Programme shall be implemented by work programmes referred to in Article 110(2) of the Financial Regulation.
The work programmes shall implement the specific objectives set out in Article 3 and the eligible actions set out in Article 8. Those work programmes shall set out in detail:
(a)
the indicative amount allocated to each action and, where relevant, the indicative total amount for all actions, as well as an indicative implementation timetable;
(b)
the essential evaluation criteria for grants, in accordance with Article 11, and the maximum co-financing rate, in accordance with Article 12.
Work programmes shall set out, where applicable, the overall amount reserved for blending operations.
2.   Work programmes implementing the specific objective referred to in Article 3(2)(b) shall be adopted by the Commission by means of implementing acts. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 21(5).
3.   Work programmes implementing the specific objective referred to in Article 3(2)(d)(i) shall be adopted by the Commission by means of implementing acts. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the advisory procedure referred to in Article 21(4).
4.   Work programmes implementing the specific objective referred to in Article 3(2)(e) through actions as set out in Article 8(8) and Annex I shall be adopted by the Commission by means of implementing acts by 30 April of the year preceding their execution, provided that the draft budget is adopted. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 21(6).
5.   Actions set out in Annex II to this Regulation implementing the specific objective referred to in Article 3(2)(f) of this Regulation shall be implemented in accordance with Articles 13, 14 and 17 of Regulation (EC) No 223/2009, including initiatives regarding the review of priorities, and through close and coordinated cooperation within the European Statistical System.
