Article 12
Co-financing rules
1.   For actions implementing the specific objective referred to in Article 3(2)(a)(ii) of this Regulation with reference to market surveillance authorities of the Member States and of the third countries associated to the Programme and with reference to Union testing facilities as referred to in Article 21 of Regulation (EU) 2019/1020, the Programme may, by way of derogation from Article 190 of the Financial Regulation, finance up to 100 % of eligible costs of an action.
2.   For grants for financial support actions in the context of the specific objective referred to in Article 3(2)(b) of this Regulation, the Programme may, by way of derogation from Article 190 of the Financial Regulation, finance up to 100 % of the eligible costs for financial support to third parties and up to 90 % of the eligible costs for the other cost categories. For EEN actions in the context of the specific objective referred to in Article 3(2)(b) of this Regulation, the Programme may, by way of derogation from Article 190 of the Financial Regulation, finance up to 100 % of the eligible costs for additional coordination and networking costs and up to 60 % of the eligible costs for the other cost categories. Moreover, eligible indirect costs shall be determined by applying a flat rate of 25 % of the total direct eligible costs, excluding direct eligible costs for subcontracting, financial support to third parties and any unit costs or lump sums which include indirect costs.
3.   For grants awarded to the PIOB implementing the specific objective referred to in Article 3(2)(c)(ii), if funding by the International Federation of Accountants (IFAC) in a given year reaches more than two-thirds of the total annual funding, the annual contribution for that year shall be limited to a maximum amount specified in the work programme referred to in Article 16(1).
4.   For grants awarded to ANEC under Article 10(1)(e), the Programme may finance up to 95 % of the eligible costs.
5.   For actions implementing the specific objective referred to in Article 3(2)(e) of this Regulation, the Programme may, by way of derogation from Article 190 of the Financial Regulation, finance up to 100 % of the eligible costs.
For the actions referred to in Annex I, points 1 and 2, the co-financing rate applied shall be 50 % of the eligible costs, with the following exceptions:
(a)
The rate shall be 75 % of the eligible costs, in respect of:
(i)
cross-border activities implemented together by two or more Member States in order to control, prevent or eradicate plant pests or animal diseases;
(ii)
Member States of which the gross national income per inhabitant based on the latest Eurostat data is less than 90 % of the Union average.
(b)
By way of derogation from Article 190 of the Financial Regulation, the rate shall be 100 % of the eligible costs, where the activities benefitting from the Union contribution concern the prevention and control of serious human, plant and animal health risks for the Union, and:
(i)
are designed to avoid human casualties or major economic disruptions for the Union as a whole;
(ii)
constitute specific tasks which are indispensable for the Union as a whole as laid down by the Commission in the work programme referred to in Article 16(4); or
(iii)
are implemented in third countries.
(c)
Where necessary on the grounds of lack of funds, insufficient implementation of the Programme or the emergency measure, or the phasing-out of the co-financing of actions against animal diseases or plant pests the co-financing rates shall be lower.
For the purposes of point (c) of the second subparagraph of this paragraph, the amount of the reduction in the co-financing rates shall reflect the significance of the grounds for a lower rate. The Commission shall adopt implementing acts establishing lower co-financing rates. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 21(6).
6.   For actions implementing the specific objective referred to in Article 3(2)(f) of this Regulation, the Programme may finance up to 95 % of the eligible costs of actions supporting collaborative networks as referred to in Article 15 of Regulation (EC) No 223/2009.
