Article 18
Evaluation
1.   Evaluations shall be carried out in a timely manner so that they can be used in the decision-making process.
2.   The interim evaluation of the Programme shall be performed by four years after the start of the implementation of the Programme. The Commission shall draw up an interim evaluation report to assess the performance of the Programme, including aspects such as effectiveness, efficiency, coherence, relevance, synergies within the Programme and Union added value.
3.   In relation to actions implementing the specific objective referred to in Article 3(2)(c)(ii), the Commission shall prepare an annual report on the activity of the International Financial Reporting Standards Foundation as regards the development of International Financial Reporting Standards, as well as, in general, of the PIOB and of the EFRAG. The Commission shall transmit the report to the European Parliament and to the Council.
4.   At the end of the implementation of the Programme and in any event four years after the end of the period specified in Article 1 the Commission shall draw up a final evaluation report to assess the performance of the Programme, including aspects such as effectiveness, efficiency, coherence, relevance, synergies within the Programme and Union added value.
5.   The Commission shall submit the interim and final evaluation reports, along with its conclusions and recommendations to the European Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions and make them publicly available. Where appropriate, the reports shall be accompanied by proposals for follow-up actions.
6.   In accordance with Article 13(5) of Regulation (EC) No 223/2009, the Commission shall consult the European Statistical System Committee for those parts of the interim and final evaluation reports that pertain to actions implementing the specific objective referred to in Article 3(2)(f) of this Regulation, prior to their adoption and submission to the European Parliament and the Council.
The Commission shall consult the European Statistical Advisory Committee for the part of the final evaluation report that pertains to actions implementing the specific objective referred to in Article 3(2)(f) of this Regulation, prior to its adoption and submission to the European Parliament and the Council.
