Article 44
Register of producers
1.   Each Member State shall, within 18 months of the date of entry into force of first implementing act adopted pursuant to paragraph 14, establish a national register which shall serve to monitor compliance of producers with the requirements set out in this Chapter.
Each national register shall provide links to other national registers of producers’ websites to facilitate, in all Member States, registration of producers or authorised representatives for the extended producer responsibility.
2.   Producers shall be obliged to register in the register referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article in each Member State where they make packaging or packaged products available on the territory of the Member State for the first time or where they unpack packaged products without being end users, by submitting an application for registration to the competent authority responsible for the register of each such Member State. Where a producer has entrusted a producer responsibility organisation with carrying out the extended producer responsibility obligations on its behalf pursuant to Article 46(1), the obligations set out in this Article shall be met by that organisation, unless otherwise specified by the Member State in which the register is established.
3.   Member States may provide that the obligations set out in this Article may, on the basis of a written mandate, be met on behalf of producers by an authorised representative for the extended producer responsibility.
4.   Producers shall not make available packaging or packaged products on the territory of a Member State for the first time, or unpack packaged products without being end users, if they or, where applicable, in accordance with Article 45, their authorised representatives for the extended producer responsibility are not registered in that Member State.
5.   The application for registration shall include the information to be provided in accordance with Part A of Annex IX. A Member State may request producers to provide additional information or documents if such information or documents are necessary to monitor and ensure compliance with this Regulation and with the rules adopted by that Member State pursuant to Article 40(2).
6.   Where an authorised representative for the extended producer responsibility represents more than one producer, it shall, in addition to the information to be provided pursuant to paragraph 5, provide the name and the contact details of each one of the producers which it represents, separately.
7.   The producer or, where applicable, the producer’s authorised representative for the extended producer responsibility or the producer responsibility organisation, as stipulated by national law in accordance with paragraphs 2 and 3 of this Article, shall submit the information set out in Part B, point 1, of Annex IX to the competent authority responsible for the register, by 1 June for each full preceding calendar year.
Member States may require the information provided pursuant to this paragraph to be audited and certified by independent auditors under the supervision of the competent authorities referred to in Article 40(1), on the basis of national standards, if any.
8.   Where a producer has made available for the first time on the territory of the Member State a quantity of packaging, including packaging of packaged products, of less than 10 tonnes during one calendar year, or where a producer as defined in Article 3(1), point (15)(e), unpacks a quantity of packaging of less than 10 tonnes during one calendar year, the producer or, where applicable, the producer’s authorised representative for the extended producer responsibility or the producer responsibility organisation, as stipulated by national law in accordance with paragraphs 2 and 3 of this Article, shall submit the information set out in Part B, point 2, of Annex IX to the competent authority responsible for the register, by 1 June for each full preceding calendar year.
By way of derogation from the first subparagraph, a Member State may, for a specific calendar year, set a lower maximum threshold than that referred to in the first subparagraph if the Member State would otherwise have insufficient accurate data in order to:
(a)
comply with the reporting obligations under Article 56(1) and (2) in that calendar year; and
(b)
ensure that the database under Article 57 is complete and provide the data under Article 56(2), point (a).
9.   If it is necessary for budgetary reasons, a Member State may require the producer to submit the information set out in Part B, points 1 and 2, of Annex IX to the competent authority responsible for the register on a quarterly basis.
10.   Producers, in the case of individual fulfilment of extended producer responsibility obligations, the producer responsibility organisation entrusted with carrying out those obligations, in the case of collective fulfilment of extended producer responsibility obligations, or the re-use system operators, in the case where re-use systems are fulfilling the extended producer responsibility obligations, shall submit the information set out in Part B, point 3, of Annex IX to the competent authority for each preceding calendar year on an annual basis.
Where under national law public authorities are responsible for the organisation of the management of packaging waste, Member States may provide that those authorities shall submit the information set out in Part B, point 3, of Annex IX.
11.   The competent authority responsible for the register:
(a)
shall receive applications for registration as referred to in paragraph 2 via an electronic data-processing system, the details of which shall be made available on the competent authority’s website;
(b)
shall grant registrations and provide a registration number within a maximum period of twelve weeks from the moment that all the information required under paragraphs 5 and 6 is provided;
(c)
may lay down modalities with respect to the requirements and process of registration without adding substantive requirements to those laid down in paragraphs 5 and 6;
(d)
may charge producers cost-based and proportionate fees for the processing of applications for registration as referred to in paragraph 2;
(e)
shall receive and monitor the information submitted pursuant to paragraphs 7 and 8.
12.   The producer, or, where applicable, the producer’s authorised representative for the extended producer responsibility or the producer responsibility organisation shall, without undue delay, notify the competent authority of any changes to the information contained in the registration and of any permanent cessation of the making available for the first time on the territory of the Member State of the packaging or packaged product referred to in the registration. A producer shall be removed from the register 3 years from the end of the calendar year in which the producer’s registration ends if the producer has ceased to exist as a producer.
13.   Member States shall ensure that the list of registered producers is easily accessible, publicly available and free of charge, without prejudice to the preservation of the confidentiality of commercially sensitive information in conformity with the relevant Union and national law. The list of registered producers shall be machine readable, sortable and searchable, and shall respect open standards for third-party use.
14.   The Commission shall, by 12 February 2026, adopt implementing acts establishing the format for registration in, and reporting to, the register and specifying the granularity of data to be provided and the packaging types and material categories to be covered by the information submitted.
The format for the submission of information pursuant to this Article shall be interoperable, shall be based on open standards and machine-readable data, and shall be transferable through an interoperable data exchange network without vendor lock-in.
Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 65(2).
