Article 12
Labelling of packaging
1.   From 12 August 2028 or 24 months from the date of entry into force of the implementing acts adopted pursuant to paragraphs 6 or 7 of this Article, whichever is the latest, packaging placed on the market shall be marked with a harmonised label containing information on its material composition in order to facilitate consumer sorting. The label shall be based on pictograms and be easily understandable, including for persons with disabilities. For the packaging referred to in Article 9(1) and, where applicable, packaging referred to in Article 9(2), the label shall indicate that the material is compostable, that it is not suitable for home composting and that compostable packaging is not to be discarded in nature. With the exception of e-commerce packaging, this obligation does not apply to transport packaging or to packaging that is subject to a deposit and return system.
The packaging placed on the market containing substances of concern shall be marked by means of standardised, open, digital-marking technologies in accordance with the methodology referred to in paragraph 7, second subparagraph.
In addition to the harmonised label referred to in this paragraph, economic operators may place a QR code or other type of standardised, open, digital data carrier on the packaging that contains information on the destination of each separate component of the packaging in order to facilitate consumer sorting.
Packaging that is subject to deposit and return systems as referred to in Article 50(1) shall be marked with a clear and unambiguous label. In addition to the national label, packaging may be marked with a harmonised colour label established in the relevant implementing act adopted pursuant to paragraph 6 of this Article. Member States may require that packaging that is subject to deposit and return systems be marked with that harmonised colour label, provided that that does not lead to distortions on the internal market or trade barriers for products from other Member States.
2.   Reusable packaging placed on the market from 12 February 2029 or 30 months from the date of entry into force of the implementing act adopted pursuant to paragraph 6, whichever is the latest, shall bear a label informing users that the packaging is reusable. Further information on reusability, including the availability of a local, national or Union-wide re-use system and information on collection points, shall be made available through a QR code or other type of standardised, open, digital data carrier that facilitates the tracking of the packaging and the calculation of trips and rotations, or, if that calculation is not feasible, an average estimation. In addition, reusable sales packaging shall be clearly identified and distinguished from single-use packaging at the point of sale.
3.   By way of derogation from paragraph 2 of this Article, the requirement to bear a label and a QR code or other type of standardised, open, digital data carrier shall not apply to open loop systems which do not have a system operator in accordance with Annex VI.
4.   Where packaging to which Article 7 applies is placed on the market from 12 August 2028 or 24 months from the date of entry into force of the implementing act adopted pursuant to paragraph 6 of this Article, whichever is the latest, and is marked with a label containing information on the share of recycled content, that label and, where applicable, the QR code or other type of standardised, open, digital data carrier shall comply with the specifications laid down in the relevant implementing act adopted pursuant to paragraph 6 of this Article and shall be based on the methodology established pursuant to Article 7(8). Where packaging is marked with a label containing information on the share of biobased plastic content, that label shall comply with the specifications laid down in the relevant implementing act adopted pursuant to paragraph 6 of this Article.
5.   Labels referred to in paragraphs 1, 2 and 4 and the QR code or other type of standardised, open, digital data carrier referred to in paragraph 2 shall be affixed, printed or engraved visibly, legibly and firmly on the packaging, so that they cannot be easily erased. The information contained therein shall also be available to end users before the purchase of the product through online sales. Where such affixing, printing or engraving is not possible or not warranted on account of the nature and size of the packaging, the label, QR code or other standardised, open, digital data carrier shall be affixed to the grouped packaging. Where even that is not possible or not warranted on account of the nature and size of the packaging or where it is relevant to provide for non-discriminatory access to information for vulnerable groups, particularly visually impaired persons, the information shall be provided via a single electronically readable code or other type of data carrier.
The information contained in the labels referred to in paragraphs 1, 2 and 4 and the QR code or other type of standardised, open, digital data carrier shall be made available in one or more languages which can be easily understood by end users, as determined by the Member State in which the packaging is to be made available on the market.
Where information is provided by electronic means in accordance with paragraphs 1, 2 and 4, the following requirements shall apply:
(a)
adequate and relevant personal data shall be collected only for the limited purpose of giving the user access to relevant compliance information referred to in paragraphs 1, 2 and 4 of this Article in respect of Article 5(1) of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council (68);
(b)
the information shall not be displayed with other information intended for sales or marketing purposes.
Where Union law requires information on the packaged product to be provided via a data carrier, a single data carrier shall be used for providing the information required for the packaged product and for the packaging, and both shall be easily distinguishable.
6.   By 12 August 2026, the Commission shall adopt implementing acts to establish a harmonised label and specifications for the labelling requirements and formats, including where provided through digital means, for the labelling of packaging referred to in paragraphs 1, 2 and 4 of this Article. When developing those implementing acts, the Commission shall take into account the specificities of composite packaging. When developing the harmonised label for packaging subject to deposit and return systems referred to in Article 50(2), the Commission shall take into consideration any variation which exists in the deposit charged by Member States. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 65(2).
7.   By 12 August 2026, the Commission shall adopt implementing acts to establish the methodology for identifying the material composition of packaging referred to in paragraph 1 by means of standardised, open, digital-marking technologies, including for composite packaging and integrated or separate components of packaging.
By 1 January 2030, the Commission shall also adopt implementing acts to establish the methodology for identifying substances of concern by means of standardised, open, digital-marking technologies. That methodology shall ensure that the marking includes at least the name and concentration of the substance of concern present in each material in a packaging unit.
Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 65(2).
8.   Without prejudice to requirements concerning other harmonised EU labels, economic operators shall not provide or display labels, marks, symbols or inscriptions that are likely to mislead or confuse consumers or other end users with respect to the sustainability requirements for packaging, other packaging characteristics or packaging waste management options for which harmonised labelling has been laid down in this Regulation. The Commission shall, where appropriate, adopt guidelines in order to clarify aspects that are likely to mislead or confuse consumers or other end users.
9.   By 12 February 2027, packaging included in an extended producer responsibility scheme may be identified throughout the territory of the Member States in which that scheme or system applies. Such identification shall be achieved only by means of a corresponding symbol in a QR code or other standardised, open, digital-marking technology in order to indicate that the producer fulfils its extended producer responsibility obligations. That symbol shall be clear and unambiguous and shall not mislead consumers or other end users as to the recyclability or reusability of the packaging.
10.   Packaging covered by a deposit and return system other than that referred to in Article 50(1) may, under national law, be identified by means of a corresponding symbol throughout the territory in which that scheme or system applies. That symbol shall be clear and unambiguous and shall not mislead consumers or other end users about the packaging recyclability and reusability in the Member States where it is to be returned. Member States shall not prohibit the affixing of labels related to deposit and return systems in place in other Member States.
11.   This Article shall not apply to immediate and outer packaging as defined in Regulations (EU) 2017/745, (EU) 2017/746 and (EU) 2019/6 and Directive 2001/83/EC, if there is no space on the packaging due to other labelling requirements as defined in those Union legislative acts or if the labelling of the packaging could jeopardise the safe use of medicinal products for human use or of veterinary medicinal products.
12.   Packaging as referred to in paragraphs 1, 2 and 4 that is manufactured in the Union or imported before the deadlines referred in those paragraphs and that does not comply with the criteria laid down in those paragraphs may be made available on the market until 3 years from the date of entry into force of the labelling requirements laid down in those paragraphs.
