Article 60
Compliant packaging which presents a risk
1.   Where, having carried out an evaluation under Article 58, a Member State finds that although packaging is in compliance with the applicable requirements laid down in or pursuant to Articles 5 to 12, it nevertheless presents a risk to the environment or human health, it shall, without delay, require the relevant economic operator to:
(a)
take all appropriate measures, within a reasonable period prescribed by the market surveillance authorities and commensurate with the nature and, where relevant, the degree of risk, to ensure that the packaging concerned, when placed on the market, no longer presents that risk;
(b)
bring the packaging into conformity;
(c)
withdraw the packaging from the market; or
(d)
recall the packaging.
2.   By way of derogation from paragraph 1, where there is a risk to human health relating to contact-sensitive packaging that is subject to a specific law aimed at protecting human health and that risk is transferred to the packaged content of the packaging material, the surveillance authorities shall not carry out an evaluation in relation to the risk to human or animal health originating from the packaging material. Instead, they shall alert the authorities competent for controlling such risks, namely the competent authorities referred to in Regulations (EU) 2017/625, (EU) 2017/745, (EU) 2017/746 or (EU) 2019/6 or Directive 2001/83/EC.
3.   The economic operator shall ensure that corrective measures are taken in respect of all the non-compliant packaging that the economic operator has made available on the market throughout the Union.
4.   The Member State shall immediately inform the Commission and the other Member States of its findings and subsequent actions pursuant to paragraph 1. That information shall include all available details, in particular the data necessary for the identification of the non-compliant packaging, the origin and the supply chain of the packaging, the nature of the risk involved and the nature and duration of the national measures taken.
5.   The Commission shall, without delay, enter into consultation with the Member State and the relevant economic operator and shall evaluate the national measures taken. On the basis of the results of that evaluation, the Commission shall adopt an implementing act determining whether the national measure is justified and, where necessary, propose appropriate measures.
That implementing act shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 65(2).
On duly justified imperative grounds of urgency relating to the protection of the environment or human health, the Commission shall adopt an immediately applicable implementing act in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 65(3).
The Commission shall address the implementing act referred to in this paragraph to all Member States and shall immediately communicate it to them and the relevant economic operator.
