Article 50
Deposit and return systems
1.   By 1 January 2029, Member States shall take the necessary measures to ensure the separate collection of at least 90 % per year by weight of the following packaging formats made available on the market for the first time in that Member State in a given calendar year:
(a)
single-use plastic beverage bottles with a capacity of up to three litres; and
(b)
single-use metal beverage containers with a capacity of up to three litres.
Member States may use the quantity of packaging waste generated from packaging placed on the market to calculate, in accordance with the implementing acts adopted pursuant to Article 56(7), point (a), the targets set out in the first subparagraph, points (a) and (b), of this paragraph.
2.   In order to achieve the targets set out in paragraph 1, Member States shall take the necessary measures to ensure that deposit and return systems are set up for the relevant packaging formats referred to in paragraph 1 and that a deposit is charged at the point of sale.
3.   By way of derogation from paragraph 2, Member States may exempt economic operators in the HORECA sector from charging a deposit where the following conditions are fulfilled:
(a)
the deposit bearing packaging is opened on the premises;
(b)
the product is consumed on the premises; and
(c)
the empty deposit bearing packaging is returned at the premises.
4.   Paragraph 2 shall not apply to packaging for:
(a)
categories of grapevine products listed in points 1, 3, 8, 9, 11, 12, 15, 16 and 17, Part II of Annex VII to Regulation (EU) No 1308/2013 or for aromatised wine products as defined in Regulation (EU) No 251/2014;
(b)
products that are similar to wine products and aromatised wine products and that are obtained from fruit other than grapes and from vegetables, and other fermented beverages falling within CN code 2206 00;
(c)
alcohol-based spirituous beverages corresponding to CN heading 2208; and
(d)
milk and milk products listed in Part XVI of Annex I to Regulation (EU) No 1308/2013.
By way of derogation from paragraph 2, Member States may exempt single-use plastic beverage bottles and single use metal beverage containers with capacities lower than 0,1 litres from participation in the deposit and return systems, where such participation is not technically feasible.
5.   Member States may be exempt from the obligation under paragraph 2 under the following conditions:
(a)
the rate of separate collection as required under Article 48 of the relevant packaging format as submitted to the Commission under Article 56(1), point (c), is 80 % or more by weight of such packaging made available on the territory of that Member State for the first time in the calendar year 2026; and
(b)
by 1 January 2028, the Member State notifies the Commission of its request for exemption and submits an implementation plan showing a strategy with concrete measures, including their timeline, that ensure achievement of the 90 % separate collection rate by weight of the packaging referred to in paragraph 1.
For the purposes of point (a), where the information on the rate of separate collection of the relevant packaging format has not yet been submitted to the Commission, the Member State shall provide a reasoned explanation as to how the conditions for the exemption set out in this paragraph are otherwise fulfilled. The reasoned explanation shall be based on validated national data and include a description of the measures implemented.
6.   Within 3 months of receipt of the implementation plan submitted pursuant to paragraph 5, point (b), the Commission may request the Member State to revise the plan if it considers that the plan does not comply with the requirements set out in paragraph 5, point (b). The Member State shall submit a revised implementation plan within 3 months of receipt of the Commission’s request.
7.   If the separate collection rate of the packaging referred to in paragraph 1 in a Member State decreases and remains below 90 % by weight of a given packaging format placed on the market for three consecutive calendar years, the Commission shall notify that Member State that the exemption no longer applies. A deposit and return system shall be established by 1 January of the second calendar year following the year in which the Commission notified the Member State concerned that the exemption no longer applies.
8.   Member States shall endeavour to establish and maintain deposit and return systems in particular for single-use glass beverage bottles and beverage cartons. Member States shall endeavour to ensure that deposit and return systems for single-use packaging formats, in particular for single-use glass beverage bottles, are equally available for reusable packaging where technically and economically feasible.
9.   A Member State may, while observing the general rules laid down in the TFEU and acting in accordance with this Regulation, adopt provisions which go beyond the minimum requirements set out in this Article, such as the possibility to include packaging listed in paragraph 4, and packaging for other products or made of other materials.
10.   Member States shall ensure that return points and opportunities for reusable packaging with a similar purpose and format to those established under paragraph 1 are as convenient for end users as return points and opportunities are to return single-use packaging to a deposit and return system.
11.   By 1 January 2029, Member States shall ensure that at least the deposit and return systems established under paragraph 2 of this Article following the entry into force of this Regulation meet the minimum requirements listed in Annex X.
The minimum requirements listed in Annex X shall not apply to deposit and return systems established before the entry into force of this Regulation which achieve the 90 % target set out in paragraph 1 of this Article by 1 January 2029. Member States shall endeavour to ensure that existing single-use deposit and return systems comply with the minimum requirements in Annex X when they are first reviewed. If the 90 % target is not achieved by 1 January 2029, existing single-use deposit and return systems shall comply with the minimum requirements in Annex X at the latest by 1 January 2035.
By 1 January 2038, the Commission, in collaboration with the Member States, shall assess the implementation of this Article and identify how to maximise the interoperability of deposit and return systems.
12.   The minimum requirements listed in Annex X to this Regulation shall not apply in outermost regions as recognised in Article 349, third paragraph, TFEU, taking into account their local specificities.
