Article 18
Obligations of importers
1.   Importers shall only place on the market packaging which is in conformity with the requirements laid down in or pursuant to Articles 5 to 12.
2.   Before placing packaging on the market, importers shall ensure that:
(a)
the conformity assessment procedure referred to in Article 38 has been carried out by the manufacturer and that the manufacturer has drawn up the technical documentation referred to in Annex VII and required under or pursuant to Articles 5 to 11;
(b)
the packaging is labelled in accordance with Article 12;
(c)
the packaging is accompanied by the required documents; and
(d)
the manufacturer has complied with the requirements set out in Article 15(5) and (6).
Where an importer considers or has reason to believe that packaging is not in conformity with the applicable requirements laid down in or pursuant to Articles 5 to 12, the importer shall not place the packaging on the market until it has been brought into conformity.
3.   Importers shall indicate on the packaging their name and their registered trade name or registered trademark as well as the postal address at which and, where available, the electronic means of communication by which they can be contacted. Where it is not possible to indicate that information on the packaging, it shall be provided via standardised, open, digital data carrier as referred to in Article 12 or in a document accompanying the packaged product.
4.   Importers shall ensure that information provided in accordance with paragraph 3 is clear, understandable and legible, and does not replace or obscure, nor can be confused with information required by other Union legal acts on the labelling of the packaged product.
5.   Importers shall ensure that while the packaging is under their responsibility, whether empty or with a product, storage or transport conditions do not jeopardise its compliance with the applicable requirements laid down in or pursuant to Articles 5 to 12.
6.   Importers who consider or have reason to believe that packaging which they have placed on the market is not in conformity with the applicable requirements laid down in or pursuant to Articles 5 to 12 shall immediately take the corrective measures necessary to bring that packaging into conformity, to withdraw it or to recall it, as appropriate. Importers shall immediately inform the market surveillance authorities of the Member States in which they made the packaging available of the suspected non-compliance and of the corrective measures taken.
7.   Importers shall keep a copy of the EU declaration of conformity at the disposal of the market surveillance authorities and ensure that the technical documentation referred to in Annex VII and required under or pursuant to Articles 5 to 11 can be made available to those authorities, upon request, as follows:
(a)
as regards single-use packaging: for 5 years from the date the packaging was placed on the market; and
(b)
as regards reusable packaging: for 10 years from the date the packaging was placed on the market.
8.   Importers shall, upon a reasoned request from a national authority, provide that authority with all the information and documentation necessary to demonstrate the conformity of packaging, including technical documentation, with the applicable requirements laid down in or pursuant to Articles 5 to 12, in one or more languages which can be easily understood by that authority. That information and documentation shall be provided in electronic form and, on request, in paper form. The relevant documents shall be made available within 10 days of receipt of the request from the national authority.
9.   Importers shall cooperate with the competent national authority on any action taken to remedy any case of non-compliance with the requirements laid down in or pursuant to Articles 5 to 12.
