Article 9
Compostable packaging
1.   By way of derogation from Article 6(1), by 12 February 2028, where packaging referred to in Article 3(1), point (1)(f), and sticky labels affixed to fruit and vegetables are placed on the market, that packaging and sticky labels shall be compatible with the standard for composting in industrially controlled conditions in bio-waste treatment facilities and shall be compatible, where required by the Member States, with the home-composting standards referred to in paragraph 6 of this Article.
2.   By way of derogation from Article 6(1), where Member States allow waste with similar biodegradability and compostability properties as bio-waste pursuant to Article 22(1) of Directive 2008/98/EC to be collected together with bio-waste, and appropriate waste collection schemes and waste treatment infrastructure are available to ensure that compostable packaging enters the bio-waste management stream, Member States may require that the following packaging shall be made available on their territory for the first time only if the packaging is compostable:
(a)
packaging referred to in Article 3(1), point (1)(g), composed of material other than metal, very lightweight plastic carrier bags and lightweight plastic carrier bags;
(b)
packaging other than that referred to in point (a) of this paragraph for which the Member State already required that they be compostable before the date of application of this Regulation.
3.   By 12 February 2028, packaging other than that referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2, including packaging made of biodegradable plastic polymers and other biodegradable materials, shall be designed for material recycling in accordance with Article 6 without affecting the recyclability of other waste streams.
4.   Compliance with the requirements set out in paragraphs 1, 2 and 3, of this Article shall be demonstrated in the technical information concerning the packaging referred to in Annex VII.
5.   The Commission may analyse whether other packaging should be included in paragraph 1 or paragraph 2, point (a), of this Article if justified and appropriate due to technological and regulatory developments that affect the elimination of compostable packaging and in the conditions established in Annex III, and, where appropriate, present a legislative proposal.
6.   By 12 February 2026, the Commission shall request the European standardisation organisations to prepare or update harmonised standards laying down the detailed technical specifications of the requirements on compostable packaging. When doing so, the Commission shall request that, in line with the latest scientific and technological developments, parameters such as retention times, temperatures and stirring, which reflect the actual conditions in home composts and in bio-waste treatment facilities, including anaerobic digestion processes, are taken into account. The Commission shall request that those standards include verification that the compostable packaging undergoing the biological decomposition subject to the specified parameters results ultimately in conversion into carbon dioxide or, in absence of oxygen, methane, and mineral salts, biomass and water.
By 12 February 2026, the Commission shall also request the European standardisation organisations to prepare harmonised standards laying down the detailed technical specifications of the requirements on home compostability of packaging referred to in paragraph 1.
