Article 46
Producer responsibility organisation
1.   Producers may entrust a producer responsibility organisation authorised in accordance with Article 47 with carrying out the extended producer responsibility obligations on their behalf. Member States may adopt measures to make entrusting the extended producer responsibility obligations to a producer responsibility organisation mandatory.
2.   Where, on the territory of a Member State, one or multiple producer responsibility organisations are authorised to fulfil extended producer responsibility obligations on behalf of producers, the Member State shall ensure that the producer responsibility organisation or organisations and producers that have not entrusted the carrying out of the extended producer responsibility obligations to a producer responsibility organisation, when taken together, cover the whole territory of the Member State as regards the activities in accordance with Article 47(3) and Articles 48 and 50. Member States shall appoint an independent third party to oversee the carrying out of the extended producer responsibility obligations by the producer responsibility organisations in a coordinated manner or shall entrust such oversight to the competent authority.
3.   Producer responsibility organisations shall ensure the confidentiality of the data in their possession as regards proprietary information or information directly attributable to individual producers or their authorised representatives.
4.   In addition to the information referred to in Article 8a(3), point (e), of Directive 2008/98/EC, producer responsibility organisations shall publish on their websites, at least once a year, information on the quantity of packaging, including packaging of packaged products, made available for the first time on the territory of a Member State, or unpacked by a producer without being an end user, and on the levels of recovered and recycled materials in relation to the quantity of packaging for which they have been performing producer responsibility obligations.
Member States may provide that public authorities that are responsible for the organisation of the management of packaging waste shall publish on their websites, at least once a year, information on the levels of recovered and recycled materials in relation to the quantity of packaging waste generated on their territory.
5.   Producer responsibility organisations shall ensure equal treatment of producers regardless of their origin or size, without placing a disproportionate burden on producers of small quantities of packaging, including packaging of packaged products, including small and medium-sized enterprises.
