Article 6
Recyclable packaging
1.   All packaging placed on the market shall be recyclable.
2.   Packaging shall be considered to be recyclable if it fulfils the following conditions:
(a)
it is designed for material recycling, which enables the use of resulting secondary raw materials that are of sufficient quality when compared to the original material that they can be used to substitute primary raw materials, in accordance with paragraph 4; and
(b)
when it becomes waste, it can be collected separately in accordance with Article 48(1) and (5), sorted into specific waste streams without affecting the recyclability of other waste streams and recycled at scale, on the basis of the methodology set out in accordance with paragraph 5 of this Article.
Packaging that is in compliance with the delegated acts adopted pursuant to paragraph 4 shall be deemed to comply with the condition set out in point (a) of the first subparagraph of this paragraph.
Packaging that is in compliance with the delegated acts adopted pursuant to paragraph 4 and the implementing acts adopted pursuant to paragraph 5 shall be deemed to comply with the conditions set out in the first subparagraph of this paragraph.
Point (a) of the first subparagraph of this paragraph shall apply from 1 January 2030 or 24 months from the date of entry into force of the delegated acts adopted pursuant to the first subparagraph of paragraph 4, whichever is the latest.
Point (b) of the first subparagraph of this paragraph shall apply from 1 January 2035 or, as regards the recycled-at-scale requirement, from 1 January 2035 or five years from the date of entry into force of the implementing acts adopted pursuant to paragraph 5, whichever is the latest.
3.   The manufacturer shall assess packaging recyclability on the basis of the delegated acts adopted pursuant to in paragraph 4 of this Article and the implementing acts adopted pursuant to paragraph 5 of this Article. Packaging recyclability shall be expressed in the recyclability performance grades A, B or C as described in Table 3 of Annex II.
Without prejudice to paragraph 10, from 1 January 2030 or 24 months from the entry into force of the delegated acts adopted pursuant to paragraph 4 of this Article, whichever is the latest, packaging shall not be placed on the market unless it is recyclable within grades A, B or C as described in Table 3 of Annex II.
Without prejudice to paragraph 10 of this Article, from 1 January 2038 packaging shall not be placed on the market unless it is recyclable within grades A or B as described in Table 3 of Annex II.
4.   By 1 January 2028, the Commission shall, after taking into consideration standards developed by the European standardisation organisations, adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 64 to supplement this Regulation by establishing:
(a)
design for recycling criteria and recyclability performance grades based on Table 3 of Annex II and the parameters listed in Table 4 of Annex II for packaging categories listed in Table 1 of Annex II; design for recycling criteria and recyclability performance grades shall be developed on the basis of the predominant material and shall:
(i)
take into account the ability of packaging waste to be separated into different material streams for recycling, sorted and recycled, so that the resulting secondary raw materials are of sufficient quality compared to the original material and can be used to substitute primary raw materials for packaging or other applications where the quality of the recycled material is retained, where feasible;
(ii)
consider established collection and sorting processes proven in an operational environment and cover all packaging components;
(iii)
take into account available recycling technologies, their economic and environmental performance, including the quality of the output, the availability of the waste, the energy needed and the emissions of greenhouse gases;
(iv)
where appropriate, identify substances of concern that negatively affect the re-use and recycling of materials in the packaging in which they are present;
(v)
where appropriate, impose restrictions on the presence of substances of concern, or of groups of such substances, in packaging or packaging components for reasons not relating primarily to chemical safety; such restrictions may also serve to reduce unacceptable risks to human health or the environment, without prejudice to the restrictions on chemicals set out in Annex XVII to Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 or, where applicable, the restrictions and specific measures on food-contact materials and articles in Regulation (EC) No 1935/2004;
(b)
how to perform recyclability performance assessment and express its result in recyclability performance grades per packaging unit, in terms of weighting, including material-specific criteria and sorting efficiency, to determine whether packaging is to be considered recyclable under paragraph 2;
(c)
a description, for each packaging category listed in Table 1 of Annex II, of the conditions for compliance with their respective recyclability performance grades;
(d)
a framework concerning the modulation of financial contributions to be paid by producers to comply with their extended producer responsibility obligations set out in Article 45(1), based on the packaging recyclability performance grades.
When adopting the delegated acts referred to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph, the Commission shall take into account the results of the assessment, if any, carried out pursuant to Article 5(2).
The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 64 to amend Table 1 of Annex II in order to adapt it to the scientific and technical developments in material and product design, and in collection, sorting and recycling infrastructure. In those delegated acts, the Commission may lay down design for recycling criteria for additional packaging categories or create sub-categories within the categories listed in Table 1 of Annex II.
Economic operators shall comply with new or updated design for recycling criteria within 3 years of the date of entry into force of the relevant delegated act.
5.   By 1 January 2030, the Commission shall adopt implementing acts establishing:
(a)
the methodology for the recycled-at-scale assessment per packaging category listed in Table 2 of Annex II, supplementing Table 3 of Annex II with thresholds for the recycled-at-scale assessment and, if necessary, updating the overall recyclability performance grades described in Table 3 of Annex II; that methodology shall be based on at least the following elements:
(i)
quantities of packaging per packaging category listed in Table 2 of Annex II placed on the market in the Union as a whole and in each Member State;
(ii)
quantities of recycled packaging waste, as calculated at the calculation point in accordance with the implementing act adopted under Article 56(7), point (a), per packaging category listed in Table 2 of Annex II, in the Union as a whole and in each Member State;
(b)
the chain of custody mechanism ensuring that packaging is recycled at scale.
The chain of custody mechanism referred to in point (b) shall be based on at least the following elements:
(i)
technical documentation referring to the quantity of collected packaging waste that is sent to sorting and recycling facilities;
(ii)
a verification process that allows manufacturers to obtain the necessary data from the downstream operators ensuring that packaging is recycled at scale.
Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 65(2).
The data referred to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph shall be available and easily accessible by the public.
6.   The Commission shall assess the granularity of data that need to be reported for the recycled-at-scale methodology. Where appropriate, the Commission shall adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 64 to amend Table 2 of Annex II and Table 3 of Annex XII to adapt them to technical and scientific development.
7.   By 2035, the Commission, on the basis of developments in sorting and recycling technologies, may review the minimum thresholds for packaging to be considered recycled at scale and, where appropriate, present a legislative proposal to revise the thresholds.
8.   In order to increase the level of recyclability of packaging, 18 months from the date of entry into force of the delegated acts adopted pursuant to paragraph 4 of this Article and implementing acts adopted pursuant to paragraph 5 of this Article, the financial contributions paid by producers in order to comply with their extended producer responsibility obligations as laid down in Article 45 shall be modulated in accordance with the recyclability performance grades, as set out in detail in the delegated acts adopted pursuant to paragraph 4 of this Article and the implementing acts adopted pursuant to paragraph 5 of this Article.
Regarding financial contributions paid by producers in order to comply with their extended producer responsibility obligations as laid down in Article 45 in respect of packaging referred to in paragraph 11, point (g), of this Article, Member States shall take into account the technical feasibility and economic viability of recycling of that packaging.
9.   Compliance with the requirements set out in paragraphs 2 and 3 of this Article shall be demonstrated in the technical documentation concerning the packaging as set out in Annex VII.
Where a unit of packaging includes integrated components, the assessment of compliance with the design for recycling criteria and with the recycled-at-scale requirements shall include all integrated components. A separate assessment shall be carried out for integrated components that can become separated from each other as a result of mechanical stress during transportation or sorting.
Where a unit of packaging includes separate components, the assessment of compliance with the design for recycling requirements and with the recycled-at-scale requirements shall be carried out separately for each separate component.
All components of a unit of packaging shall be compatible with the established collection, sorting and recycling processes proven in an operational environment and shall not hinder the recyclability of the main body of the packaging unit.
10.   By way of derogation from paragraphs 2 and 3, from 1 January 2030, innovative packaging that does not comply with the requirements under paragraph 2 may be made available on the market up to 5 years from the end of the calendar year in which it was placed on the market.
Where use is made of this derogation, the economic operator shall notify the competent authority before the innovative packaging is placed on the market and shall include all technical details demonstrating that the packaging is innovative packaging. That notification shall include a timeline for reaching the recycled-at-scale requirements in terms of collection and recycling of the innovative packaging. The information shall be made available to the Commission and the national authorities carrying out market surveillance.
If the competent authority considers that the packaging is not innovative packaging, the economic operator shall comply with the existing design for recycling criteria.
If the competent authority considers that the packaging is innovative packaging, it shall inform the Commission accordingly.
The Commission shall assess requests by competent authorities in relation to innovative nature of packaging and update or adopt new delegated acts under paragraph 4 of this Article, as appropriate.
The Commission shall monitor the impact of the derogation referred to in the first subparagraph on the quantity of packaging placed on the market. The Commission shall, where appropriate, present a legislative proposal with a view to amending that subparagraph.
Member States shall continuously aim to improve collection and sorting infrastructures for innovative packaging with expected environmental benefits.
11.   This Article shall not apply to the following:
(a)
immediate packaging as defined in Article 1, point (23), of Directive 2001/83/EC and in Article 4, point (25), of Regulation (EU) 2019/6;
(b)
contact-sensitive packaging of medical devices covered by Regulation (EU) 2017/745;
(c)
contact-sensitive packaging of in vitro diagnostic medical devices covered by Regulation (EU) 2017/746;
(d)
outer packaging as defined in Article 1, point (24), of Directive 2001/83/EC and in Article 4, point (26), of Regulation (EU) 2019/6 in cases where such packaging is necessary to comply with specific requirements to preserve the quality of the medicinal product;
(e)
contact-sensitive packaging for infant formula and follow-on formula, processed cereal-based food and baby food, and food for special medical purposes as defined in Article 1, points (a), (b) and (c), of Regulation (EU) No 609/2013;
(f)
packaging used for the transport of dangerous goods in accordance with Directive 2008/68/EC;
(g)
sales packaging made from lightweight wood, cork, textile, rubber, ceramic, porcelain or wax; however, paragraph 8 shall apply to such packaging.
12.   By 1 January 2035, the Commission shall review the exceptions under paragraph 11, taking into account at least the evolution of sorting and recycling technologies and practical experience gained by the economic operators and Member States. On that basis, the Commission shall assess the appropriateness of the continuation of those exceptions and, where appropriate, present a legislative proposal.
