Article 25
Restrictions on use of certain packaging formats
1.   From 1 January 2030, economic operators shall not place on the market packaging in the formats and for the uses listed in Annex V.
2.   By way of derogation from Article 4(2), Member States may maintain restrictions adopted before 1 January 2025 on the placing on the market of packaging in the formats and for the uses listed in Annex V but made from materials not listed in Annex V.
3.   Paragraph 1 of this Article shall be without prejudice to Article 9(2), point (b).
4.   By way of derogation from paragraph 1 of this Article, Member States may allow micro-enterprises as defined in Recommendation 2003/361/EC as applicable on 11 February 2025 to place on the market packaging in the formats and for the uses listed in point 3 of Annex V to this Regulation where it has been demonstrated that it is not technically feasible not to use such packaging or to obtain access to infrastructure that is necessary for the functioning of a re-use system.
5.   By 12 February 2032, the Commission shall assess the positive environmental impact of the restrictions and derogations and exemptions from these restrictions, and shall take into account the availability of alternative packaging solutions that meet safety and hygiene requirements applicable to contact-sensitive packaging. On the basis of that assessment, the Commission shall, with the objective of reducing packaging waste, review this Article and Annex V to adapt them to technical and scientific progress. On the basis of that review, the Commission shall assess the appropriateness of establishing new restrictions on the use of specific packaging formats and the relevance of maintaining the derogations and exemptions set out in this Article, and, where appropriate, shall present a legislative proposal.
6.   By 12 February 2027, the Commission shall publish guidelines, in consultation with Member States and the European Food Safety Authority, which explain Annex V in more detail, including examples of the packaging formats in scope, and any exemptions from the restrictions, and provide a non-exhaustive list of fruits and vegetables that are excluded from point 2 of Annex V.
