Article 45
Extended producer responsibility
1.   Producers shall have extended producer responsibility under the schemes established in accordance with Articles 8 and 8a of Directive 2008/98/EC and with this Section for the packaging, including packaging of packaged products, that they make available for the first time on the territory of a Member State or that they unpack without being end users.
2.   In addition to the costs referred to in Article 8a(4), point (a), of Directive 2008/98/EC, the financial contributions paid by the producer shall cover the following costs:
(a)
costs of labelling waste receptacles for the collection of packaging waste as referred to in Article 13 of this Regulation; and
(b)
costs of carrying out compositional surveys of collected mixed municipal waste under Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2023/595 (74) and under the implementing acts to be adopted pursuant to Article 56(7), point (a), of this Regulation where those implementing acts provide for an obligation to carry out such surveys.
The costs to be covered shall be established in a transparent, proportional, non-discriminatory and efficient way.
3.   A producer referred to in Article 3(1), point (15)(c) and (d), shall appoint, by written mandate, an authorised representative for the extended producer responsibility in each Member State where the producer makes packaging or packaged products available for the first time, other than the Member State where the producer is established. Member States may provide that producers established in third countries shall appoint, by written mandate, an authorised representative for the extended producer responsibility when making packaging or packaged products available on their territory for the first time.
4.   For the purposes of compliance with Article 30(1), points (d) and (e), of Regulation (EU) 2022/2065, providers of online platforms that fall within the scope of Section 4 of Chapter III of that Regulation and that allow consumers to conclude distance contracts with producers shall obtain the following information from producers that offer packaging or packaged products to consumers located in the Union prior to allowing those producers to use their services:
(a)
information on the registration of the producers referred to in Article 44 of this Regulation in the Member State where the consumer is located and the registration number(s) of the producer in that register;
(b)
a self-certification by the producer confirming that it only offers packaging with regard to which the extended producer responsibility requirements referred to in paragraphs 1, 2 and3 of this Article are complied with in the Member State where the consumer is located.
Where a producer sells its products via an online marketplace, the obligations set out in paragraph 2 of this Article may, on the basis of written mandate, be met by the provider of the online platform, on behalf of the producer.
5.   Member States may provide that, where automated data reconciliation with the national register is provided for in that Member State, it shall be applicable for verification of the information referred to in paragraph 4, points (a) and (b).
6.   Upon receiving the information referred to in paragraph 4 and prior to allowing producers to use its services, the provider of the online platform shall make best efforts to assess whether the information received is complete and reliable.
7.   Producers offering packaging or packaged products to consumers located in the Union shall provide fulfilment service providers with the information referred to in paragraph 4, points (a) and (b), of this Article at the moment of the conclusion of the contract between the fulfilment service provider and the producer for any of the services referred to in Article 3, point (11), of Regulation (EU) 2019/1020.
8.   Upon receiving the information referred to in paragraph 7of this Article and at the moment of the conclusion of the contract between the fulfilment service provider and the producer for any of the services referred to in Article 3, point (11), of Regulation (EU) 2019/1020, the fulfilment service provider shall, through the use of any freely accessible official online database or online interface made available by a Member State or the Union or by means of the publicly available registration list under Article 44(13) of this Regulation or requests to the producer to provide supporting documents from reliable sources, make best efforts to assess whether the information referred to in paragraph 7 of this Article is reliable and complete. For the purposes of this Regulation, producers shall be responsible for the accuracy of the information provided.
Where the fulfilment service provider obtains sufficient indications or has reason to believe that any item of information referred to in paragraph 7 obtained from the producer concerned is inaccurate, incomplete or not up-to-date, that fulfilment service provider shall request that the producer remedies that situation without delay or within the period set by Union or national law, as applicable.
Where the producer fails to correct or complete that information, the fulfilment service provider shall swiftly suspend the provision of its service to that producer in relation to the offering of packaging or packaged products to consumers located in the Union until the request has been fully complied with. The fulfilment service provider shall provide the producer with the reasons for the suspension.
9.   Without prejudice to Article 4 of Regulation (EU) 2019/1150 of the European Parliament and of the Council (75), in the event that a fulfilment service provider suspends the provision of its services pursuant to paragraph 8 of this Article, the producer concerned shall have the right to challenge the decision of the fulfilment service provider before a court in a Member State in which the fulfilment service provider is established.
