Article 43
Prevention of packaging waste
1.   Each Member State shall reduce the packaging waste generated per capita, as compared to the packaging waste generated per capita in 2018 as reported to the Commission in accordance with Decision 2005/270/EC, by at least:
(a)
5 % by 2030;
(b)
10 % by 2035;
(c)
15 % by 2040.
2.   In order to support Member States achieve the packaging waste prevention targets set out in paragraph 1 of this Article, by 12 February 2027, the Commission shall establish a correction factor to account for the increase or decrease in tourism in relation to the base year 2018 by means of implementing acts adopted pursuant to Article 56(7), point (c). That correction factor shall be based on the rate of packaging waste generation per tourist and the variation in the number of tourists relative to the base year 2018 and take the packaging waste reduction potential in tourism into account.
3.   Without prejudice to paragraphs 1 and 4, Member States that have already established separate systems for the management of household packaging waste, on the one hand, and for industrial and commercial packaging waste, on the other, may retain those systems.
4.   In achieving the targets set out in paragraph 1, each Member State shall endeavour to reduce the quantity of plastic packaging waste generated.
5.   In addition to the measures provided for by this Regulation, Member States shall, in line with the overall objectives of the Union’s waste policy and in order to reach the targets set out in this Article, implement measures that aim to prevent the generation of packaging waste and to minimise the environmental impact of packaging. Such measures may include the use of economic instruments and other measures to provide incentives for the application of the waste hierarchy, such as the measures referred to in Annexes IV and IVa to Directive 2008/98/EC, or other appropriate instruments and measures, including incentives provided through extended producer responsibility schemes, and obligations on producers or producer responsibility organisations to adopt waste prevention plans. The measures shall be proportionate and non-discriminatory and be designed so as to avoid barriers to trade or distortions of competition. Such measures shall not lead to a shift to lighter packaging material being used to fulfil the goal of packaging waste reduction.
6.   For the purpose of paragraph 5 of this Article and without prejudice to Article 16(2) of Directive (EU) 2020/2184 of the European Parliament and of the Council (73), Member States shall incentivise restaurants, canteens, bars, cafés and catering services to serve their customers tap water, where available, free of charge or for a low service fee, in a reusable or refillable format.
7.   For the purpose of paragraph 5, Member States may introduce packaging waste prevention measures that exceed the minimum targets set out in paragraph 1, while acting in accordance with this Regulation.
8.   By way of derogation from paragraph 1, Member States may, by 31 December 2025, request the Commission to use a base year other than 2018 for the calculations of the targets set out in paragraph 1. If a Member State makes such request, the Commission may, without prejudice to paragraphs 5 and 7, allow the Member State to use such other base year for the purpose of calculating the targets set out in paragraph 1 on condition that the Member State provide substantiated evidence:
(a)
of a significant increase in packaging waste during the year that it requests to use as a base year for the purpose of calculating the targets set out in paragraph 1;
(b)
that the significant increase in packaging waste demonstrated under point (a) is due to changes in the reporting procedures only;
(c)
that the significant increase in packaging waste demonstrated under point (a) is not due to an increased consumption; and
(d)
of better comparability of data between the Member States.
9.   By 12 February 2032, the Commission shall review the targets laid down in paragraph 1 and assess the need to include specific targets for certain packaging materials. To that end, the Commission shall submit a report to the European Parliament and to the Council, accompanied, if the Commission finds it appropriate, by a legislative proposal.
