Article 6
Licences to import from third countries
1. The release for free circulation in the Community or inward processing of controlled substances shall be subject to the presentation of an import licence. Such licences shall be issued by the Commission after verification of compliance with Articles 6, 7, 8 and 13. The Commission shall forward a copy of each licence to the competent authority of the Member State into which the substances concerned are to be imported. Each Member State shall appoint a competent authority for that purpose. Controlled substances listed in groups I, II, III, IV and V as listed in Annex I shall not be imported for inward processing.
2. The licence, when related to an inward-processing procedure, shall be issued only if the controlled substances are to be used in the customs territory of the Community under the system of suspension provided for in Article 114(2) (a) of Regulation (EEC) No 2913/92, and under the condition that the compensating products are re-exported to a State where the production, consumption or import of that controlled substance is not prohibited. The licence shall only be issued following approval of the competent authority of the Member State in which the inward-processing operation is to take place.
3. A request for a licence shall state:
(a) the names and the addresses of the importer and the exporter;
(b) the country of exportation;
(c) the country of final destination if controlled substances are to be used in the customs territory of the Community under the inward-processing procedure as referred to in paragraph 2;
(d) a description of each controlled substance, including:
- the commercial description,
- the description and the CN code as laid down in Annex IV,
- the nature of the substance (virgin, recovered or reclaimed),
- the quantity of the substance in kilograms;
(e) the purpose of the proposed import;
(f) if known, the place and date of the proposed importation and, where relevant, any changes to these data.
4. The Commission may require a certificate attesting the nature of substances to be imported.
5. The Commission may, in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 18(2), modify the list of items mentioned in paragraph 3 and Annex IV.

