Article 17
Leakages of controlled substances
1. All precautionary measures practicable shall be taken to prevent and minimise leakages of controlled substances. In particular, fixed equipment with a refrigerating fluid charge of more than 3 kg shall be checked for leakages annually. Member States shall define the minimum qualification requirements for the personnel involved. By 31 December 2001 at the latest, Member States shall report to the Commission on the programmes related to the above qualification requirements. The Commission shall evaluate the measures taken by the Member States. In the light of this evaluation and of technical and other relevant information, the Commission, as appropriate, shall propose measures regarding those minimum qualification requirements.
The Commission shall promote the preparation of European standards relating to the control of leakages and to the recovery of substances leaking from commercial and industrial air-conditioning and refrigeration equipment, from fire-protection systems and from equipment containing solvents as well as, as appropriate, to technical requirements with respect to the leakproofness of refrigeration systems.
2. All precautionary measures practicable shall be taken to prevent and minimise leakages of methyl bromide from fumigation installations and operations in which methyl bromide is used. Whenever methyl bromide is used in soil fumigation, the use of virtually impermeable films for a sufficient time, or other techniques ensuring at least the same level of environmental protection shall be mandatory. Member States shall define the minimum qualification requirements for the personnel involved.
3. All precautionary measures practicable shall be taken to prevent and minimise leakages of controlled substances used as feedstock and as processing agents.
4. All precautionary measures practicable shall be taken to prevent and minimise any leakage of controlled substances inadvertently produced in the course of the manufacture of other chemicals.
5. The Commission shall develop as appropriate and ensure the dissemination of notes describing best available technologies and best environmental practices concerning the prevention and minimisation of leakages and emissions of controlled substances.

