Article 5
Control of the use of hydrochlorofluorocarbons
1. Subject to the following conditions, the use of hydrochlorofluorocarbons shall be prohibited:
(a) in aerosols;
(b) as solvents:
(i) in non-contained solvent uses including open-top cleaners and open-top dewatering systems without refrigerated areas, in adhesives and mould-release agents when not employed in closed equipment, for drain cleaning where hydrochlorofluorocarbons are not recovered;
(ii) from 1 January 2002, in all solvent uses, with the exception of precision cleaning of electrical and other components in aerospace and aeronautics applications where the prohibition shall enter into force on 31 December 2008;
(c) as refrigerants:
(i) in equipment produced after 31 December 1995 for the following uses:
- in non-confined direct-evaporation systems,
- in domestic refrigerators and freezers,
- in motor vehicle, tractor and off-road vehicle or trailer air conditioning systems operating on any energy source, except for military uses where the prohibition shall enter into force on 31 December 2008,
- in road public-transport air-conditioning,
(ii) in rail transport air-conditioning, in equipment produced after 31 December 1997;
(iii) from 1 January 2000, in equipment produced after 31 December 1999 for the following uses:
- in public and distribution cold stores and warehouses,
- for equipment of 150 kw and over, shaft input,
(iv) from 1 January 2001, in all other refrigeration and air-conditioning equipment produced after 31 December 2000, with the exception of fixed air-conditioning equipment, with a cooling capacity of less than 100 kW, where the use of hydrochlofluorocarbons shall be prohibited from 1 July 2002 in equipment produced after 30 June 2002 and of reversible air-conditioning/heat pump systems where the use of hydrochlorofluorocarbons shall be prohibited from 1 January 2004 in all equipment produced after 31 December 2003;
(v) from 1 January 2010, the use of virgin hydrochlorofluorocarbons shall be prohibited in the maintenance and servicing of refrigeration and air-conditioning equipment existing at that date; all hydrochlorofluorocarbons shall be prohibited from 1 January 2015.
Before 31 December 2008 the Commission shall review the technical and economic availability of alternatives to recycled hydrochlorofluorocarbons.
The review shall take into account the availability of technically and economically feasible alternatives to hydrochlorofluorocarbons in existing refrigeration equipment with the view to avoiding undue abandonment of equipment.
Alternatives for consideration should have a significantly less harmful effect on the environment than hydrochlorofluorocarbons.
The Commission shall submit the result of the review to the European Parliament and to the Council. It shall, as appropriate, in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 18(2), take a decision on whether to adapt the date of 1 January 2015;
(d) for the production of foams:
(i) for the production of all foams except integral skin foams for use in safety applications and rigid insulating foams;
(ii) from 1 October 2000, for the production of integral skin foams for use in safety applications and polyethylene rigid insulating foams;
(iii) from 1 January 2002, for the production of extruded polystyrene rigid insulating foams, except where used for insulated transport;
(iv) from 1 January 2003, for the production of polyurethane foams for appliances, of polyurethane flexible faced laminate foams and of polyurethane sandwich panels, except where these last two are used for insulated transport;
(v) from 1 January 2004, for the production of all foams, including polyurethane spray and block foams;
(e) as carrier gas for sterilisation substances in closed systems, in equipment produced after 31 December 1997;
(f) in all other applications.
2. By way of derogation from paragraph l, the use of hydrochlorofluorocarbons shall be permitted:
(a) in laboratory uses, including research and development;
(b) as feedstock;
(c) as a processing agent.
3. By way of derogation from paragraph 1, the use of hydrochlorofluorocarbons as fire-fighting agents in existing fire protection systems may be permitted for replacing halons in applications listed in Annex VII under the following conditions:
- halons contained in such fire protection systems shall be replaced completely,
- halons withdrawn shall be destroyed,
- 70 % of the destruction costs shall be covered by the supplier of the hydrochlorofluorocarbons,
- each year, Member States making use of this provision shall notify to the Commission the number of installations and the quantities of halons concerned.
4. The importation and placing on the market of products and equipment containing hydrochlorofluorocarbons for which a use restriction is in force under this Article shall be prohibited from the date on which the use restriction comes into force. Products and equipment shown to be manufactured before the date of that use restriction shall not be covered by this prohibition.
5. Until 31 December 2009, the use restrictions under this Article shall not apply to the use of hydrochlorofluorocarbons for the production of products for export to countries where the use of hydrochlorofluorocarbons in those products is still permitted.
6. The Commission may, in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 18(2), in the light of experience with the operation of this Regulation or to reflect technical progress, modify the list and the dates set out in paragraph 1, but in no case extend the periods set out therein, without prejudice to the exemptions provided for in paragraph 7.
7. The Commission may, following a request by a competent authority of a Member State and in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 18(2), authorise a time-limited exemption to allow the use and placing on the market of hydrochlorofluorocarbons in derogation from paragraph 1 and Article 4(3) where it is demonstrated that, for a particular use, technically and economically feasible alternative substances or technologies are not available or cannot be used. The Commission shall immediately inform the Member States of any exemptions granted.

