Whereas:
(1) It is established that continued emissions of ozone-depleting substances at current levels continue to cause significant damage to the ozone layer. Ozone depletion in the southern hemisphere reached unprecedented levels in 1998. In three out of four recent springs severe ozone depletion has occurred in the Arctic region. Increased UV-B radiation resulting from ozone depletion poses a significant threat to health and environment. Further efficient measures need therefore to be taken in order to protect human health and the environment against adverse effects resulting from such emissions.
(2) In view of its responsibilities for the environment and trade, the Community, pursuant to Decision 88/540/EEC(4), has become a Party to the Vienna Convention for the Protection of the Ozone Layer and the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer, as amended by the Parties to the Protocol at their second meeting in London and at their fourth meeting in Copenhagen.
(3) Additional measures for the protection of the ozone layer were adopted by the Parties to the Montreal Protocol at their seventh meeting in Vienna in December 1995 and at their ninth meeting in Montreal in September 1997, in which the Community participated.
(4) It is necessary for action to be taken at Community level to carry out the Community's obligations under the Vienna Convention and the latest amendments and adjustments to the Montreal Protocol, in particular to phase out the production and the placing on the market of methyl bromide within the Community and to provide for a system for the licensing not only of imports but also of exports of ozone-depleting substances.
(5) In view of the earlier than anticipated availability of technologies for replacing ozone-depleting substances, it is appropriate in certain cases to provide for control measures which are stricter than those provided for in Council Regulation (EC) No 3093/94 of 15 December 1994 on substances that deplete the ozone layer(5) and stricter than those of the Montreal Protocol.
(6) Regulation (EC) No 3093/94 must be modified substantially. It is in the interest of legal clarity and transparency to revise that Regulation completely.
(7) Under Regulation (EC) No 3093/94 the production of chlorofluorocarbons, other fully halogenated chlorofluorocarbons, halons, carbon tetrachloride, 1,1,1-trichloroethane and hydrobromofluorocarbons has been phased out. The production of those controlled substances is thus prohibited, subject to possible derogation for essential uses and to meet the basic domestic needs of Parties pursuant to Article 5 of the Montreal Protocol. It is now also appropriate progressively to prohibit the placing on the market and use of those substances and of products and equipment containing those substances.
(8) Even after the phase-out of controlled substances the Commission may under certain conditions grant exemptions for essential uses.
(9) The growing availability of alternatives to methyl bromide should be reflected in more substantial reductions in its production and consumption compared to the Montreal Protocol. The production and consumption of methyl bromide should cease completely subject to possible derogations for critical uses determined at Community level following the criteria established under the Montreal Protocol. Also the use of methyl bromide for quarantine and preshipment applications should be controlled. Such use should not exceed current levels and ultimately be reduced in the light of technical development and developments under the Montreal Protocol.
(10) Regulation (EC) No 3093/94 provides for controls on the production of all other ozone-depleting substances but not for controls on the production of hydrochlorofluorocarbons. It is appropriate to introduce such provision to ensure that hydrochlorofluorocarbons do not continue to be used where non-ozone-depleting alternatives exist. Measures for the control of the production of hydrochlorofluorocarbons should be taken by all Parties to the Montreal Protocol. A freeze on production of hydrochlorofluorocarbons would reflect that need and the Community's determination to take a leading role in this respect. The quantities produced should be adapted to the reductions envisaged for the placing on the Community market of hydrochlorofluorocarbons and to the declining demand worldwide as a consequence of reductions in the consumption of hydrochlorofluorocarbons required by the Protocol.
(11) The Montreal Protocol, in Article 2F(7), requires the Parties to endeavour to ensure that the use of hydrochlorofluorocarbons is limited to those applications where other more environmentally suitable alternative substances or technologies are not available. In view of the availability of alternative and substitute technologies, the placing on the market and use of hydrochlorofluorocarbons and products containing hydrochlorofluorocarbons can be further limited. Decision VI/13 of the Meeting of the Parties to the Montreal Protocol provides that the evaluation of alternatives to hydrochlorofluorocarbons should take into account such factors as ozone-depleting potential, energy efficiency, potential flammability, toxicity and global warming and the potential impacts on the effective use and phase-out of chlorofluorocarbons and halons. Hydrochlorofluorocarbon controls under the Montreal Protocol should be considerably tightened to protect the ozone layer and to reflect the availability of alternatives.
(12) Quotas for the release for free circulation in the Community of controlled substances should be allocated only for limited uses of controlled substances. Controlled substances and products containing controlled substances from States not party to the Montreal Protocol should not be imported.
(13) The licensing system for controlled substances should be extended to include the authorisation of exports of controlled substances, in order to monitor trade in ozone-depleting substances and to allow for exchange of information between Parties.
(14) Provision should be made for the recovery of used controlled substances, and to prevent leakages of controlled substances.
(15) The Montreal Protocol requires reporting on trade in ozone-depleting substances. Annual reporting should therefore be required from producers, importers and exporters of controlled substances.
(16) The measures necessary for the implementation of this Regulation should be adopted in accordance with Council Decision 1999/468/EC of 28 June 1999 laying down the procedures for the exercise of implementing powers conferred on the Commission(6).
(17) Decision X/8 of the 10th meeting of the Parties to the Montreal Protocol encourages Parties to take measures actively, as appropriate, to discourage the production and marketing of new ozone-depleting substances and in particular of bromochloromethane. To this end a mechanism should be established to provide for new substances to be addressed by this Regulation. The production, importation, placing on the market and use of bromochloromethane should be prohibited.
(18) The switch to new technologies or alternative products, required because the production and use of controlled substances are to be phased out, could lead to problems for small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) in particular. The Member States should therefore consider providing appropriate forms of assistance specifically to enable SMEs to make the necessary changes,
HAVE ADOPTED THIS REGULATION:

