Article 16
Recovery of used controlled substances
1. Controlled substances contained in:
- refrigeration, air-conditioning and heat pump equipment, except domestic refrigerators and freezers,
- equipment containing solvents,
- fire protection systems and fire extinguishers,
shall be recovered for destruction by technologies approved by the Parties or by any other environmentally acceptable destruction technology, or for recycling or reclamation during the servicing and maintenance of equipment or before the dismantling or disposal of equipment.
2. Controlled substances contained in domestic refrigerators and freezers shall be recovered and dealt with as provided for in paragraph 1 after 31 December 2001.
3. Controlled substances contained in products, installations and equipment other than those mentioned in paragraphs 1 and 2 shall be recovered, if practicable, and dealt with as provided in paragraph 1.
4. Controlled substances shall not be placed on the market in disposable containers, except for essential uses.
5. Member States shall take steps to promote the recovery, recycling, reclamation and destruction of controlled substances and shall assign to users, refrigeration technicians or other appropriate bodies responsibility for ensuring compliance with the provisions of paragraph 1. Member States shall define the minimum qualification requirements for the personnel involved. By 31 December 2001 at the latest, Member States shall report to the Commission on the programmes related to the above qualification requirements. The Commission shall evaluate the measures taken by the Member States. In the light of this evaluation and of technical and other relevant information, the Commission, as appropriate, shall propose measures regarding those minimum qualification requirements.
6. Member States shall report to the Commission by 31 December 2001 on the systems established to promote the recovery of used controlled substances, including the facilities available and the quantities of used controlled substances recovered, recycled, reclaimed or destroyed.
7. This Article shall be without prejudice to Council Directive 75/442/EEC of 15 July 1975 on waste(8) or to measures adopted following Article 2(2) of that Directive.

