Article 3
Control of production of controlled substances
1. Subject to paragraphs 5 to 10, the production of the following shall be prohibited:
(a) chlorofluorocarbons;
(b) other fully halogenated chlorofluorocarbons;
(c) halons;
(d) carbon tetrachloride;
(e) 1,1,1-trichloroethane;
(f) hydrobromofluorocarbons.
In the light of the proposals made by Member States, the Commission shall, in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 18(2), apply the criteria set out in Decision IV/25 of the Parties in order to determine every year any essential uses for which the production and importation of controlled substances referred to in the first subparagraph may be permitted in the Community and those users who may take advantage of those essential uses. Such production and importation shall be allowed only if no adequate alternatives or recycled or reclaimed controlled substances referred to in the first subparagraph are available from any of the Parties.
2. (i) Subject to paragraphs 5 to 10, each producer shall ensure that:
(a) the calculated level of its production of methyl bromide in the period 1 January to 31 December 1999 and in each 12-month period thereafter does not exceed 75 % of the calculated level of its production of methyl bromide in 1991;
(b) the calculated level of its production of methyl bromide in the period 1 January to 31 December 2001 and in each 12-month period thereafter does not exceed 40 % of the calculated level of its production of methyl bromide in 1991;
(c) the calculated level of its production of methyl bromide in the period 1 January to 31 December 2003 and in each 12-month period thereafter does not exceed 25 % of the calculated level of its production of methyl bromide in 1991;
(d) it produces no methyl bromide after 31 December 2004.
The calculated levels referred to in subparagraphs (a), (b), (c) and (d) shall not include the amount of methyl bromide produced for quarantine and preshipment applications.
(ii) In the light of the proposals made by Member States, the Commission shall, in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 18(2), apply the criteria set out in Decision IX/6 of the Parties, together with any other relevant criteria agreed by the Parties, in order to determine every year any critical uses for which the production, importation and use of methyl bromide may be permitted in the Community after 31 December 2004, the quantities and uses to be permitted and those users who may take advantage of the critical exemption. Such production and importation shall be allowed only if no adequate alternatives or recycled or reclaimed methyl bromide is available from any of the Parties.
In an emergency, where unexpected outbreaks of particular pests or diseases so require, the Commission, at the request of the competent authority of a Member State, may authorise the temporary use of methyl bromide. Such authorisation shall apply for a period not exceeding 120 days and to a quantity not exceeding 20 tonnes.
3. Subject to paragraphs 8, 9 and 10, each producer shall ensure that:
(a) the calculated level of its production of hydrochlorofluorocarbons in the period 1 January 2000 to 31 December 2000 and in each 12-month period thereafter does not exceed the calculated level of its production of hydrochlorofluorocarbons in 1997;
(b) the calculated level of its production of hydrochlorofluorocarbons in the period 1 January 2008 to 31 December 2008 and in each 12-month period thereafter does not exceed 35 % of the calculated level of its production of hydrochlorofluorocarbons in 1997;
(c) the calculated level of its production of hydrochlorofluorocarbons in the period 1 January 2014 to 31 December 2014 and in each 12-month period thereafter does not exceed 20 % of the calculated level of its production of hydrochlorofluorocarbons in 1997;
(d) the calculated level of its production of hydrochlorofluorocarbons in the period 1 January 2020 to 31 December 2020 and in each 12-month period thereafter does not exceed 15 % of the calculated level of its production of hydrochlorofluorocarbons in 1997;
(e) it produces no hydrochlorofluorocarbons after 31 December 2025.
Before 31 December 2002, the Commission shall review the level of production of hydrochlorofluorocarbons with a view to determining:
- whether a production cut ahead of the year 2008 should be proposed, and/or
- whether a change to the levels of production provided for under (b), (c) and (d) should be proposed.
This review will take into account the development of hydrochlorofluorocarbon consumption worldwide, the hydrochlorofluorocarbon exports from the Community and other OECD countries and the technical and economic availability of alternative substances or technologies as well as relevant international developments under the Protocol.
4. The Commission shall issue licences to those users identified in accordance with the second subparagraph of paragraph 1 and paragraph 2(ii) and shall notify them of the use for which they have authorisation and the substances and quantities thereof that they are authorised to use.
5. A producer may be authorised by the competent authority of the Member State in which that producer's relevant production is situated to produce the controlled substances referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 for the purpose of meeting the requests licensed in accordance with paragraph 4. The competent authority of the Member State concerned shall notify the Commission in advance of its intention to issue any such authorisation.
6. The competent authority of the Member State in which a producer's relevant production is situated may authorise that producer to exceed the calculated levels of production laid down in paragraphs 1 and 2 in order to satisfy the basic domestic needs of Parties pursuant to Article 5 of the Protocol, provided that the additional calculated levels of production of the Member State concerned do not exceed those permitted for that purpose by Articles 2A to 2E and 2H of the Protocol for the periods in question. The competent authority of the Member State concerned shall notify the Commission in advance of its intention to issue any such authorisation.
7. To the extent permitted by the Protocol, the competent authority of the Member State in which a producer's relevant production is situated may authorise that producer to exceed the calculated levels of production laid down in paragraphs 1 and 2 in order to satisfy any essential, or critical, uses of Parties at their request. The competent authority of the Member State concerned shall notify the Commission in advance of its intention to issue any such authorisation.
8. To the extent permitted by the Protocol, the competent authority of the Member State in which a producer's relevant production is situated may authorise that producer to exceed the calculated levels of production laid down in paragraphs 1 to 7 for the purpose of industrial rationalisation within the Member State concerned, provided that the calculated levels of production of that Member State do not exceed the sum of the calculated levels of production of its domestic producers as laid down in paragraphs 1 to 7 for the periods in question. The competent authority of the Member State concerned shall notify the Commission in advance of its intention to issue any such authorisation.
9. To the extent permitted by the Protocol, the Commission may, in agreement with the competent authority of the Member State in which a producer's relevant production is situated, authorise that producer to exceed the calculated levels of production laid down in paragraphs 1 to 8 for the purpose of industrial rationalisation between Member States, provided that the combined calculated levels of production of the Member States concerned do not exceed the sum of the calculated levels of production of their domestic producers as laid down in paragraphs 1 to 8 for the periods in question. The agreement of the competent authority of the Member State in which it is intended to reduce production shall also be required.
10. To the extent permitted by the Protocol, the Commission may, in agreement with both the competent authority of the Member State in which a producer's relevant production is situated and the government of the third Party concerned, authorise a producer to combine the calculated levels of production laid down in paragraphs 1 to 9 with the calculated levels of production allowed to a producer in a third Party under the Protocol and that producer's national legislation for the purpose of industrial rationalisation with a third Party, provided that the combined calculated levels of production by the two producers do not exceed the sum of the calculated levels of production allowed to the Community producer under paragraphs 1 to 9 and the calculated levels of production allowed to the third Party producer under the Protocol and any relevant national legislation.

