Article 6
Sovereignty Portal
1.   The Commission shall set up a dedicated publicly available website (the ‘Sovereignty Portal’), providing information about funding opportunities for projects linked to the STEP objectives and enhancing the visibility of those projects, in particular by displaying the following information:
(a)
information about Union programmes within the scope of this Regulation and ongoing and upcoming calls for proposals and calls for tenders linked to the STEP objectives under those respective programmes;
(b)
details of projects that have been awarded a Sovereignty Seal in accordance with Article 4;
(c)
details of projects that have been recognised as strategic projects under the Net-Zero Industry Act and the Critical Raw Materials Act, to the extent that they fall within the scope of Article 2 of this Regulation;
(d)
details of projects supporting the STEP objectives that have been selected for support under the ERDF, the Cohesion Fund, the ESF+ or the JTF, to the extent that they have been communicated to the Commission in accordance with paragraph 5 of this Article;
(e)
contacts of the national competent authorities designated in accordance with paragraph 4.
2.   The Sovereignty Portal shall also display information about the implementation of the STEP and information in relation to Union budget expenditure as referred to in Article 7, as well as information about the performance indicators defined under the respective programmes.
3.   The Sovereignty Portal shall be launched on 1 March 2024 and shall be updated by the Commission on a regular basis.
4.   By 2 June 2024, each Member State shall designate a single national competent authority to act as its main point of contact for the implementation of the STEP at national level.
5.   Where available, the national competent authorities referred to in paragraph 4 of this Article shall communicate details of projects supporting the STEP objectives that have been selected for support under the ERDF, the Cohesion Fund, the ESF+ or the JTF to the Commission for display on the Sovereignty Portal.
