Article 4
Sovereignty Seal, combined and cumulative funding
1.   The Commission shall award a Sovereignty Seal to any project contributing to any of the STEP objectives, provided that the project has been assessed and complies with minimum quality requirements, in particular eligibility, exclusion and award criteria, provided for in a call for proposals under Regulation (EU) 2021/522, (EU) 2021/694, (EU) 2021/695, or (EU) 2021/697, or under Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2019/856 (27).
2.   A call for proposals as referred to in paragraph 1 may include geographical limitations and shall, where appropriate, in accordance with the relevant sector-specific Union legislation, include obligations to respect working and employment conditions under applicable Union and national law, International Labour Organization conventions and collective agreements.
3.   The Sovereignty Seal shall be used as a quality label, in particular for the purposes of:
(a)
receiving support for the project under another Union programme in accordance with the rules applicable to that programme; or
(b)
financing the project through cumulative or combined funding with another Union instrument in accordance with the rules applicable to those instruments.
4.   When revising their recovery and resilience plans in accordance with Regulation (EU) 2021/241, Member States shall, without prejudice to the provisions of that Regulation, consider as priority projects those projects that have been awarded a Sovereignty Seal pursuant to paragraph 1 of this Article.
5.   When deciding on investment projects to finance from their respective shares of the Modernisation Fund in accordance with Article 10d of Directive 2003/87/EC, Member States may consider as priority projects for critical clean and resource-efficient technologies those projects that have been awarded a Sovereignty Seal in accordance with paragraph 1 of this Article. In addition, Member States may decide to grant national support to projects that have been awarded a Sovereignty Seal and contribute to the STEP objective referred to in Article 2(1), point (a)(ii), of this Regulation.
6.   In accordance with Regulation (EU) 2021/523, the Sovereignty Seal shall be taken into account in the context of the procedure provided for in Article 19 of the EIB Statute and of the policy check laid down in Article 23(3) of that Regulation. In addition, the implementing partners shall examine in a timely manner projects that have been awarded the Sovereignty Seal where they fall within their geographic and activity scope as laid down in Article 26(5) of Regulation (EU) 2021/523.
7.   Strategic projects recognised in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Net-Zero Industry Act and the Critical Raw Materials Act that fall within the scope of Article 2 of this Regulation and that receive a contribution under the programmes referred to in Article 3 of this Regulation may also receive a contribution from any other Union programme, including funds under shared management, provided that those contributions do not cover the same costs. The rules of the relevant Union programme shall apply to the corresponding contribution to the strategic project. The cumulative funding shall not exceed the total eligible costs of the strategic project. The support from the different Union programmes may be calculated on a pro rata basis in accordance with the documents setting out the conditions for support.
8.   The award of a Sovereignty Seal and the provision of cumulative funding shall be without prejudice to applicable State aid rules and to the Union’s international obligations.
9.   The Sovereignty Seal shall be valid for the period of implementation of the project to which it was awarded and shall cease to be valid if that project has not started within five years of the award, or the project has been relocated outside the Union.
