Article 20
Monitoring
1.   Member States shall monitor the following:
(a)
the condition and trend in the condition of the habitat types, and the quality and the trend in the quality of the habitats of the species referred to in Articles 4 and 5 in the areas subject to restoration measures on the basis of the monitoring referred to in Article 15(3), point (p);
(b)
the area of urban green space and urban tree canopy cover within urban ecosystem areas, as referred to in Article 8 and determined in accordance with Article 14(4);
(c)
at least two of the biodiversity indicators for agricultural ecosystems chosen by the Member State in accordance with Article 11(2);
(d)
the populations of the common farmland bird species listed in Annex V;
(e)
the biodiversity indicator for forest ecosystems referred to in Article 12(2);
(f)
at least six of the biodiversity indicators for forest ecosystems chosen by the Member State in accordance with Article 12(3);
(g)
the abundance and diversity of pollinator species, according to the method established in accordance with Article 10(2);
(h)
the area and condition of the areas covered by the habitat types listed in Annexes I and II;
(i)
the area and the quality of the habitat of the species referred to in Article 4(7), and Article 5(5);
(j)
the extent and location of the areas where habitat types and habitats of the species have significantly deteriorated and of the areas subject to compensatory measures taken under Article 4(13), as well as the effectiveness of the compensatory measures to ensure that any deterioration of habitat types and habitats of the species is not significant at the level of each biogeographical region in their territory and to ensure that meeting the targets and fulfilling the objectives set out in Articles 1, 4 and 5 is not jeopardised.
2.   The monitoring in accordance with paragraph 1, point (a), shall start as soon as the restoration measures are put in place.
3.   The monitoring in accordance with paragraph 1, points (b), (c), (d), (e) and (f), shall start on 18 August 2024.
4.   The monitoring in accordance with paragraph 1, point (g), of this Article shall start one year after the entry into force of the delegated act referred to in Article 10(2).
5.   The monitoring in accordance with paragraph 1, point (j), of this Article shall start as soon as the notification referred to in Article 4(13) is submitted to the Commission.
6.   The monitoring in accordance with paragraph 1, points (a) and (b), shall be carried out at least every six years. The monitoring in accordance with paragraph 1, point (c), concerning, where applicable, the stock of organic carbon in cropland mineral soils and the share of agricultural land with high-diversity landscape features, and paragraph 1, point (f), concerning, where applicable, the standing deadwood, the lying deadwood, the share of forests with uneven-aged structure, the forest connectivity, the stock of organic carbon, the share of forest dominated by native tree species and the tree species diversity, shall be carried out at least every six years, or, where necessary to evaluate the achievement of increasing trends to 2030, within a shorter interval. The monitoring in accordance with paragraph 1, point (c), concerning, where applicable, the grassland butterfly index, paragraph 1, point (d), concerning the common farmland bird index and paragraph 1, point (e) concerning the common forest bird index, and paragraph 1, point (g) concerning pollinator species shall be carried out every year. The monitoring in accordance with paragraph 1, points (h) and (i), shall be carried out at least every six years and shall be coordinated with the reporting cycle under Article 17 of Directive 92/43/EEC and the initial assessment under Article 17 of Directive 2008/56/EC. The monitoring in accordance with paragraph 1, point (j), shall be carried out every three years.
7.   Member States shall ensure that the indicators for agricultural ecosystems referred to in Article 11(2), point (b), and the indicators for forest ecosystems referred to in Article 12(3), points (a), (b) and (e), of this Regulation, are monitored in a manner consistent with the monitoring required under Regulations (EU) 2018/841 and (EU) 2018/1999.
8.   Member States shall make public the data generated by the monitoring carried out under this Article, in accordance with Directive 2007/2/EC and in accordance with the monitoring frequencies set out in paragraph 6 of this Article.
9.   Member State monitoring systems shall operate on the basis of electronic databases and geographic information systems, and shall maximise the access and use of data and services from remote sensing technologies, earth observation (Copernicus services), in-situ sensors and devices, or citizen science data, leveraging the opportunities offered by artificial intelligence, advanced data analysis and processing.
10.   By 31 December 2028, the Commission shall establish a guiding framework for setting the satisfactory levels referred to in Article 8(2) and (3), Article 10(1) and Article 11(2), by means of implementing acts.
11.   The Commission may, by means of implementing acts:
(a)
specify the methods for monitoring the indicators for agricultural ecosystems listed in Annex IV;
(b)
specify the methods for monitoring the indicators for forest ecosystems listed in Annex VI;
(c)
establish a guiding framework for setting the satisfactory levels referred to in Article 12(2) and (3).
12.   Implementing acts referred to in paragraphs (10) and (11) of this Article shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 24(2).
