Article 21
Reporting
1.   By 30 June 2028 and at least every three years thereafter, Member States shall report electronically the following data to the Commission:
(a)
the area subject to restoration measures referred to in Articles 4 to 12;
(b)
the extent of the areas where habitat types and habitats of species have significantly deteriorated and of the areas subject to compensatory measures taken under Article 4(13);
(c)
the barriers referred to in Article 9 that have been removed; and
(d)
their contribution to the commitment referred to in Article 13.
2.   By 30 June 2031, for the period up to 2030, and at least every six years thereafter, Member States shall report electronically the following data and information to the Commission, assisted by the EEA:
(a)
the progress in implementing the national restoration plan, in putting in place the restoration measures and progress in meeting the targets and fulfilling the obligations set out in Articles 4 to 13;
(b)
information on:
(i)
the location of the areas where habitat types or habitats of species have significantly deteriorated and of the areas subject to compensatory measures taken under Article 4(13);
(ii)
a description of the effectiveness of the compensatory measures taken under Article 4(13) in ensuring that any deterioration of habitat types and habitats of species is not significant at the level of each biogeographical region in their territory;
(iii)
a description of the effectiveness of the compensatory measures taken under Article 4(13) in ensuring that meeting the targets and fulfilling the objectives set out in Articles 1, 4 and 5 is not jeopardised.
(c)
the results of the monitoring carried out in accordance with Article 20, including, in the case of the results of the monitoring carried out in accordance with Article 20(1), points (h) and (i), geographically referenced maps;
(d)
the location and extent of the areas subject to restoration measures referred to in Articles 4 and 5, and Article 11(4), including a geographically referenced map of those areas;
(e)
the updated inventory of barriers referred to in Article 9(1);
(f)
information on the progress accomplished towards meeting financing needs, in accordance with Article 15(3), point (u), including a review of actual investment against initial investment assumptions.
3.   The Commission shall establish the format, structure and detailed arrangements for the presentation of the information referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article by means of implementing acts. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 24(2). When drawing up the format, structure and detailed arrangements for the electronic reporting, the Commission shall be assisted by the EEA.
4.   By 31 December 2028 and every three years thereafter, the EEA shall provide to the Commission a technical overview of the progress towards the achievement of the targets and fulfilment of the obligations set out in this Regulation, on the basis of the data made available by Member States in accordance with paragraph 1 of this Article and Article 20(8).
5.   By 30 June 2032 and every six years thereafter, the EEA shall provide to the Commission a Union-wide technical report on the progress towards meeting the targets and fulfilment of the obligations set out in this Regulation on the basis of the data made available by Member States in accordance with paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of this Article. The EEA may also use information reported under Article 17 of Directive 92/43/EEC, Article 15 of Directive 2000/60/EC, Article 12 of Directive 2009/147/EC and Article 17 of Directive 2008/56/EC.
6.   From 19 August 2029, and every six years thereafter, the Commission shall report to the European Parliament and to the Council on the implementation of this Regulation.
7.   By 19 August 2025, the Commission shall, in consultation with Member States, submit a report to the European Parliament and the Council containing:
(a)
an overview of financial resources available at Union level for the purpose of implementing this Regulation;
(b)
an assessment of the funding needs to implement Articles 4 to 13 and to achieve the objective set out in Article 1(2);
(c)
an analysis to identify any funding gaps in the implementation of the obligations set out in this Regulation;
(d)
where appropriate, proposals for adequate measures, including financial measures to address the gaps identified, such as the establishment of dedicated funding, and without prejudging the prerogatives of co-legislators for the adoption of the multiannual financial framework post 2027.
8.   Member States shall ensure that the information referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article is adequate and up-to-date and that it is available to the public in accordance with Directives 2003/4/EC, 2007/2/EC and (EU) 2019/1024.
