Article 14
Preparation of the national restoration plans
1.   Member States shall each prepare a national restoration plan and carry out the preparatory monitoring and research needed to identify the restoration measures that are necessary to meet the restoration targets and fulfil the obligations set out in Articles 4 to 13 and to contribute to the Union’s overarching objectives and targets set out in Article 1, taking into account the latest scientific evidence.
2.   Member States shall quantify the area that needs to be restored to meet the restoration targets set out in Articles 4 and 5, taking into account the condition of the habitat types referred to in Article 4(1) and (4) and Article 5(1) and (2) and the quality and quantity of the habitats of the species referred to in Article 4(7) and Article 5(5) that are present in the ecosystems covered by Article 2. The quantification shall be based, inter alia, on the following information:
(a)
for each habitat type:
(i)
the total habitat area and a map of its current distribution;
(ii)
the habitat area that is not in good condition;
(iii)
the favourable reference area, taking into account records of historical distribution and the projected changes to environmental conditions due to climate change;
(iv)
the areas most suitable for the re-establishment of habitat types in view of ongoing and projected changes to environmental conditions due to climate change;
(b)
the sufficient quality and quantity of the habitats of the species required for reaching their favourable conservation status, taking into account the areas most suitable for re-establishment of those habitats, and the connectivity needed between them in order for the species populations to thrive, as well as ongoing and projected changes to environmental conditions due to climate change, the competing needs of the habitats and species, and the presence of high nature value farmland.
For the purpose of quantifying the area of each habitat type that needs to be restored to meet the restoration targets set out in Article 4(1), point (a), and Article 5(1), point (a), the habitat area that is not in good condition referred to in the first subparagraph, point (a)(ii), of this paragraph shall only include those areas for which the condition of the habitat type is known.
For the purpose of quantifying the area of each habitat type that needs to be restored to meet the restoration targets set out in Article 4(1), point (b), and Article 5(1), points (b), (c) and (d), the habitat area that is not in good condition referred to in the first subparagraph, point (a)(ii), of this paragraph shall only include those areas for which the condition of the habitat type is known or is to be known pursuant to Article 4(9) and Article 5(7).
If a Member State intends to apply the derogation laid down in Article 4(2), that Member State shall identify the percentages referred to in that Article.
If a Member State intends to apply the derogation laid down in Article 4(5) and Article 5(3), that Member State shall identify the lower percentages chosen pursuant to those Articles.
3.   With regard to group 7 of the habitat types listed in Annex II, Member States shall set the percentage referred to in Article 5(1), point (d).
4.   Member States shall determine and map urban ecosystem areas as referred to in Article 8 for all their cities and towns and suburbs.
The urban ecosystem area of a city or of a town and suburb shall include:
(a)
the entire city or town and suburb; or
(b)
parts of the city or of the town and suburb, including at least its urban centres, urban clusters and, if deemed appropriate by the Member State concerned, peri-urban areas.
Member States may aggregate the urban ecosystem areas of two or more adjacent cities, or two or more adjacent towns and suburbs, or both, into one urban ecosystem area common to those cities, or towns and suburbs, respectively.
5.   By 2030, Member States shall set, through an open and effective process and assessment based on the latest scientific evidence, the guiding framework referred to in Article 20(10) and, if available, the guiding framework referred to in Article 20(11) satisfactory levels for:
(a)
pollinator populations referred to in Article 10(1) and for the indicator referred to in Article 12(2);
(b)
each of the chosen indicators referred to in Article 11(2);
(c)
each of the chosen indicators referred to in Article 12(3);
(d)
urban green space referred to in Article 8(2); and
(e)
urban tree canopy cover referred to in Article 8(3).
6.   Member States shall identify and map the agricultural and forest areas in need of restoration, in particular the areas that, due to intensification or other management factors, are in need of enhanced connectivity and landscape diversity.
7.   Each Member State may, by 19 August 2025, develop a methodology to complement the methodology referred to in Annex IV, in order to monitor high-diversity landscape features not covered by the common method referred to in the description of high-diversity landscape features in that Annex. The Commission shall provide guidance on the framework for developing such methodologies by 19 September 2024.
8.   Member States shall, where applicable, determine the reduction of the extent of the rewetting of peatland under agricultural use, as referred to in Article 11(4), fifth subparagraph.
9.   Member States shall identify synergies with climate change mitigation, climate change adaptation, land degradation neutrality and disaster prevention and prioritise restoration measures accordingly. Member States shall also take into account:
(a)
their integrated national energy and climate plans referred to in Article 3 of Regulation (EU) 2018/1999;
(b)
their long-term strategy referred to in Article 15 of Regulation (EU) 2018/1999;
(c)
the binding overall Union target for 2030 set out in Article 3 of Directive (EU) 2018/2001.
10.   Member States shall identify synergies with agriculture and forestry. They shall also identify existing agricultural and forestry practices, including CAP interventions, that contribute to the objectives of this Regulation.
11.   The implementation of this Regulation shall not imply an obligation for Member States to reprogramme any funding under the CAP, the CFP or other agricultural and fisheries funding programmes and instruments under the MFF 2021-2027.
12.   Member States may promote the deployment of private or public support schemes to the benefit of stakeholders implementing restoration measures referred to in Articles 4 to 12 including land managers and owners, farmers, foresters and fishers.
13.   Member States shall coordinate the development of national restoration plans with the mapping of areas that are required in order to fulfil at least their national contributions towards the 2030 renewable energy target and, where relevant, with the designation of the renewables acceleration areas and dedicated infrastructure areas. During the preparation of the national restoration plans, Member States shall ensure synergies with the build-up of renewable energy and energy infrastructure and any renewables acceleration areas and dedicated infrastructure areas that are already designated and shall ensure that the functioning of those areas, including the permit-granting procedures applicable in those areas provided for by Directive (EU) 2018/2001, as well as the functioning of grid projects that are necessary to integrate renewable energy into the electricity system and the respective permit-granting process, remain unchanged.
14.   When preparing their national restoration plans, Member States shall take into account in particular the following:
(a)
the conservation measures established for Natura 2000 sites in accordance with Directive 92/43/EEC;
(b)
prioritised action frameworks prepared in accordance with Directive 92/43/EEC;
(c)
measures for achieving good quantitative, ecological and chemical status of water bodies included in the programmes of measures and river basin management plans prepared in accordance with Directive 2000/60/EC and flood risk management plans established in accordance with Directive 2007/60/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (47);
(d)
where applicable, marine strategies for achieving good environmental status for all Union marine regions prepared in accordance with Directive 2008/56/EC;
(e)
national air pollution control programmes prepared under Directive (EU) 2016/2284;
(f)
national biodiversity strategies and action plans developed in accordance with Article 6 of the Convention on Biological Diversity;
(g)
where applicable, conservation and management measures adopted under the CFP;
(h)
CAP strategic plans drawn up in accordance with Regulation (EU) 2021/2115;
15.   When preparing their national restoration plans Member States shall also take into account strategic critical raw material projects where recognised under Union law.
16.   When preparing their national restoration plans, Member States:
(a)
may make use of the different examples of restoration measures listed in Annex VII, depending on specific national and local conditions, and the latest scientific evidence;
(b)
shall aim to optimise the ecological, economic and social functions of ecosystems as well as their contribution to the sustainable development of the relevant regions and communities;
(c)
may take into account the diversity of situations in various regions related to social, economic and cultural requirements, regional and local characteristics and population density; where appropriate, the specific situation of the Union’s outermost regions, such as their remoteness, insularity, small size, difficult topography and climate, as well as their rich biodiversity and the associated costs for protecting and restoring their ecosystems, should be taken into account.
17.   Member States shall, where possible, foster synergies with the national restoration plans of other Member States, in particular for ecosystems that span across borders or where Members States share a marine region or subregion within the meaning of Directive 2008/56/EC.
18.   Member States may, where practical and appropriate, for the purpose of preparing and implementing national restoration plans, in relation to the restoration and re-establishment of marine ecosystems, use existing regional institutional cooperation structures.
19.   Where Member States identify an issue which is likely to prevent the fulfilment of the obligations to restore and re-establish marine ecosystems, and which requires measures for which they are not competent, they shall, individually or jointly, address, where concerned, Member States, the Commission or international organisations, providing them with a description of the identified issue and of possible measures, with a view to their consideration and potential adoption.
20.   Member States shall ensure that the preparation of the restoration plan is open, transparent, inclusive and effective and that the public, including all relevant stakeholders, is given early and effective opportunities to participate in its preparation. Consultations shall comply with the requirements set out in Directive 2001/42/EC.
