Article 10
Restoration of pollinator populations
1.   Member States shall, by putting in place in a timely manner appropriate and effective measures, improve pollinator diversity and reverse the decline of pollinator populations at the latest by 2030 and thereafter achieve an increasing trend of pollinator populations, measured at least every six years from 2030, until satisfactory levels are achieved, as set in accordance with Article 14(5).
2.   The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 23 to supplement this Regulation by establishing and updating a science-based method for monitoring pollinator diversity and pollinator populations. The Commission shall adopt the first of those delegated acts establishing such method by 19 August 2025.
3.   The method referred to in paragraph 2 shall provide a standardised approach for collecting annual data on the abundance and diversity of pollinator species across ecosystems, for assessing pollinator population trends and the effectiveness of restoration measures adopted by Member States in accordance with paragraph 1.
4.   When using the method referred to in paragraph 2, Member States shall ensure that monitoring data comes from an adequate number of sites to ensure representativeness across their territories. Member States shall promote citizen science in the collection of monitoring data where suitable and provide adequate resources for the performance of those tasks.
5.   The Commission and the relevant Union agencies, in particular the EEA, the European Food Safety Authority and the European Chemicals Agency, shall, in accordance with their respective mandates, coordinate their activities concerning pollinators and provide information to support Member States, upon their request, in the fulfilment of their obligations under this Article. To that end the Commission shall, inter alia, set up a dedicated task force and disseminate relevant information and expertise to Member States in a coordinated manner.
