Article 22
Amendment of Annexes
1.   The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 23 in order to amend Annex I by adapting the way the habitat types are grouped to technical and scientific progress and to take into account the experience gained from the application of this Regulation.
2.   The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 23 in order to amend Annex II by adapting:
(a)
the list of habitat types to ensure consistency with updates to the European nature information system (EUNIS) habitat classification; and
(b)
the way the habitat types are grouped to technical and scientific progress and to take into account the experience gained from the application of this Regulation.
3.   The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 23 in order to amend Annex III by adapting the list of marine species referred to in Article 5 to technical and scientific progress.
4.   The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 23 in order to amend Annex IV by adapting the description, unit and methodology of biodiversity indicators for agricultural ecosystems to technical and scientific progress.
5.   The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 23 in order to amend Annex V by adapting the list of species used for the common farmland bird index in the Member States to technical and scientific progress.
6.   The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 23 in order to amend Annex VI by adapting the description, unit and methodology of biodiversity indicators for forest ecosystems to technical and scientific progress.
7.   The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 23 in order to amend Annex VII by adapting the list of examples of restoration measures to technical and scientific progress and to take into account the experience gained from the application of this Regulation.
