Article 11
Restoration of agricultural ecosystems
1.   Member States shall put in place the restoration measures necessary to enhance biodiversity in agricultural ecosystems, in addition to the areas that are subject to restoration measures under Article 4(1), (4) and (7), taking into account climate change, the social and economic needs of rural areas and the need to ensure sustainable agricultural production in the Union.
2.   Member States shall put in place measures which shall aim to achieve an increasing trend at national level of at least two out of the three following indicators for agricultural ecosystems, as further specified in Annex IV, measured in the period from 18 August 2024 until 31 December 2030, and every six years thereafter, until the satisfactory levels as set in accordance with Article 14(5) are reached:
(a)
grassland butterfly index;
(b)
stock of organic carbon in cropland mineral soils;
(c)
share of agricultural land with high-diversity landscape features.
3.   Member States shall put in place restoration measures which shall aim to ensure that the common farmland bird index at national level based on the species specified in Annex V, indexed on 1 September 2025 = 100, reaches the following levels:
(a)
for Member States listed in Annex V with historically more depleted populations of farmland birds: 110 by 2030, 120 by 2040 and 130 by 2050;
(b)
for Member States listed in Annex V with historically less depleted populations of farmland birds: 105 by 2030, 110 by 2040 and 115 by 2050.
4.   Member States shall put in place measures which shall aim to restore organic soils in agricultural use constituting drained peatlands. Those measures shall be in place on at least:
(a)
30 % of such areas by 2030, of which at least a quarter shall be rewetted;
(b)
40 % of such areas by 2040, of which at least a third shall be rewetted;
(c)
50 % of such areas by 2050, of which at least a third shall be rewetted.
Member States may put in place restoration measures, including rewetting, in areas of peat extraction sites and count those areas as contributing to meeting the respective targets referred to in the first subparagraph, points (a), (b) and (c).
In addition, Member States may put in place restoration measures to rewet organic soils that constitute drained peatlands under land uses other than agricultural use and peat extraction and count those rewetted areas as contributing, up to a maximum of 40 %, to meeting the targets referred to in the first subparagraph, points (a), (b) and (c).
Restoration measures that consist in rewetting peatland, including the water levels to be achieved, shall contribute to reducing greenhouse gas net emissions and increasing biodiversity, while taking national and local circumstances into account.
Where duly justified, the extent of the rewetting of peatland under agricultural use may be reduced to less than required under the first subparagraph, points (a), (b) and (c), of this paragraph by a Member State if such rewetting is likely to have significant negative impacts on infrastructure, buildings, climate adaptation or other public interests and if such rewetting cannot take place on land other than agricultural land. Any such reduction shall be determined in accordance with Article 14(8).
The obligation for Member States to meet the rewetting targets set out in the first subparagraph, points (a), (b) and (c), does not imply an obligation for farmers and private landowners to rewet their land, for whom rewetting on agricultural land remains voluntary, without prejudice to obligations stemming from national law.
Member States shall, as appropriate, incentivise rewetting to make it an attractive option for farmers and private landowners and foster access to training and advice to farmers and other stakeholders on the benefits of rewetting peatland and on the options of subsequent land management and related opportunities.
