Article 19
Review of the national restoration plan
1.   Each Member State shall review and revise its national restoration plan, and include supplementary measures, by 30 June 2032 and subsequently by 30 June 2042. At least once every ten years thereafter, each Member State shall review its national restoration plan and, if necessary, revise it and include supplementary measures.
The reviews shall be carried out in accordance with Articles 14 and 15, taking into account progress made in the implementation of the plans, the best available scientific evidence as well as available knowledge of changes or expected changes in environmental conditions due to climate change. In the reviews to be carried out by 30 June 2032 and by 30 June 2042, Member States shall take into account the knowledge on the condition of habitat types listed in Annexes I and II acquired in accordance with Article 4(9) and Article 5(7). Each Member State shall publish and submit to the Commission its revised national restoration plan.
2.   Where monitoring carried out in accordance with Article 20 indicates that the measures set out in the national restoration plan will not be sufficient to meet the restoration targets and fulfil the obligations set out in Articles 4 to 13, the Member State shall review the national restoration plan and, if necessary, revise it and include supplementary measures. Member States shall publish and submit to the Commission their revised national restoration plans.
3.   Based on the information referred to in Article 21(1) and (2) and the assessment referred to in Article 21(4) and (5), if the Commission considers that the progress made by a Member State is insufficient to meet the targets and fulfil the obligations set out in Articles 4 to 13, the Commission may, after consultation with the Member State concerned, request the Member State to submit a revised draft national restoration plan with supplementary measures. The Member State shall publish that revised national restoration plan with supplementary measures and submit it to the Commission within six months from the date of receipt of the request from the Commission. Upon request of the Member State concerned and where duly justified, the Commission may extend that deadline by an additional six months.
