Article 29
Prohibitions and compliance with Community rules
1. The importation and transit of animal by-products and processed products shall be prohibited, except in accordance with this Regulation.
2. The importation into, and the transit through, the Community of the products referred to in Annexes VII and VIII may take place only if such products satisfy the requirements set out in paragraphs 3 to 6.
3. Products referred to in Annexes VII and VIII shall, save as otherwise specified in those Annexes, come from a third country or parts of third countries on a list to be drawn up and updated in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 33(2).
The list may be combined with other lists drawn up for public and animal health purposes.
When the list is drawn up, particular account shall be taken of:
(a) the legislation of the third country;
(b) the organisation of the competent authority and its inspection services in the third country, the powers of those services, the supervision to which they are subject, and their authority to monitor effectively the application of their legislation;
(c) the actual health conditions applied to the production, manufacture, handling, storage and dispatch of products of animal origin intended for the Community;
(d) the assurances the third country can give regarding compliance with the relevant health conditions;
(e) experience of marketing the product from the third country and the results of import checks carried out;
(f) the result of any Community inspections in the third country;
(g) the health status of the livestock, other domestic animals and wildlife in the third country, having particular regard to exotic animal diseases and any aspects of the general health situation in the country which might pose a risk to public or animal health in the Community;
(h) the regularity and speed with which the third country supplies information about the existence of infectious or contagious animal diseases in its territory, in particular the diseases mentioned in Lists A and B of the OIE or, in the case of diseases of aquaculture animals, the notifiable diseases as listed in the Aquatic Animal Health Code of the OIE;
(i) the regulations on the prevention and control of infectious or contagious animal diseases in force in the third country and their implementation, including rules on imports from other countries.
4. Products referred to in Annexes VII and VIII, except for technical products, must come from plants on a Community list drawn up under the procedure referred to in Article 33(2) on the basis of a communication from the competent authorities of the third country to the Commission declaring that the plant complies with the Community requirements and is subject to supervision by an official inspection service in the third country.
Approved lists shall be amended as follows:
(a) the Commission shall inform the Member States of the modifications proposed by the third country concerned to the lists of plants within five working days of the receipt of the proposed modifications;
(b) the Member States shall have seven working days, from receipt of the modifications to the lists of plants referred to in (a), to send any written comments to the Commission;
(c) when at least one Member State makes written comments, the Commission shall inform the Member States within five working days and include the point on the agenda of the next meeting of the Standing Committee on the Food Chain and Animal Health for decision under the procedure referred to in Article 33(2);
(d) when the Commission receives no comments from the Member States within the time limit referred to in subparagraph (b), Member States shall be considered to have accepted the modifications to the list. The Commission shall inform the Member States within five working days, and imports shall be authorised from such plants five working days after receipt of this information by the Member States.
5. Technical products referred to in Annex VIII must come from plants that the competent authorities of the third countries have approved and registered.
6. Save as otherwise specified in Annexes VII and VIII, a health certificate corresponding to the model laid down in Annex X, certifying that the products meet the conditions referred to in those Annexes and come from plants offering such conditions, must accompany consignments of products referred to in those Annexes.
7. Pending the compilation of the list provided for in paragraph 4 and the adoption of model certificates as referred to in paragraph 6, Member States may maintain the controls provided for in Directive 97/78/EC and certificates provided for under existing national rules.

