Article 12
Approval of incineration and co-incineration plants
1. The incineration and co-incineration of processed products shall take place in accordance with the provisions of Directive 2000/76/EC. The incineration and co-incineration of animal by-products shall take place either in accordance with the provisions of Directive 2000/76/EC or, when that Directive does not apply, in accordance with the provisions of this Regulation. Incineration and co-incineration plants shall be approved under that Directive or in accordance with paragraph 2 or 3.
2. To be approved by the competent authority for the purpose of disposing of animal by-products, a high-capacity incineration or co-incineration plant to which Directive 2000/76/EC does not apply must fulfil:
(a) the general conditions laid down in Annex IV, Chapter I;
(b) the operating conditions laid down in Annex IV, Chapter II;
(c) the requirements laid down in Annex IV, Chapter III, concerning water discharges;
(d) the requirements laid down in Annex IV, Chapter IV, concerning residues;
(e) the temperature measurement requirements laid down in Annex IV, Chapter V; and
(f) the conditions concerning abnormal operating laid down in Annex IV, Chapter VI.
3. To be approved by the competent authority for the purpose of disposing of animal by-products, a low-capacity incineration or co-incineration plant to which Directive 2000/76/EC does not apply must:
(a) be used only for the disposal of dead pet animals and/or Category 2 and Category 3 material;
(b) when located on a holding, be used only for the disposal of material from that particular holding;
(c) fulfil the general conditions laid down in Annex IV, Chapter I;
(d) fulfil the applicable operating conditions laid down in Annex IV, Chapter II;
(e) fulfil the requirements laid down in Annex IV, Chapter IV, concerning residues;
(f) fulfil the applicable temperature measurement requirements laid down in Annex IV, Chapter V; and
(g) fulfil the conditions concerning abnormal operating laid down in Annex IV, Chapter VI.
4. Approval shall be suspended immediately if the conditions under which it was granted are no longer fulfilled.
5. The requirements of paragraphs 2 and 3 may be modified in the light of developments in scientific knowledge in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 33(2), after consultation of the appropriate scientific committee.

