Article 9
Sanctions
Member States shall provide for adequate sanctions to be applicable in the event of infringement of national legislation adopted pursuant to this Directive. These sanctions must be effective, proportionate and dissuasive.

Article 10

Technical amendments
1.   Modifications of the exposure limit values and action values set out in the Annex shall be adopted by the European Parliament and the Council in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 137(2) of the Treaty.
2.   Amendments to the Annex of a strictly technical nature in line with:
(a)
the adoption of Directives in the field of technical harmonisation and standardisation with regard to the design, building, manufacture or construction of work equipment and/or workplaces;
(b)
technical progress, changes in the most relevant harmonised European standards or specifications, and new scientific findings concerning electromagnetic fields
shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure referred to in Article 11(2).

Article 11

Committee
1.   The Commission shall be assisted by the Committee referred to in Article 17 of Directive 89/391/EEC.
2.   Where reference is made to this paragraph, Articles 5 and 7 of Decision 1999/468/EC shall apply, having regard to the provisions of Article 8 thereof.
The period referred to in Article 5(6) of Decision 1999/468/EC shall be set at three months.
3.   The Committee shall adopt its rules of procedure.
SECTION IV
FINAL PROVISIONS

Article 12

Reports
Every five years Member States shall provide a report to the Commission on the practical implementation of this Directive, indicating the points of view of the social partners.
Every five years the Commission shall inform the European Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the Advisory Committee on Safety and Health Protection at Work of the content of these reports, of its assessment of developments in the field in question and of any initiative, in particular as regards exposure to static magnetic fields, that may be warranted in the light of new scientific knowledge.

Article 13

Transposition
1.   The Member States shall bring into force the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply with this Directive no later than ... (11). They shall forthwith inform the Commission thereof.
When Member States adopt these measures, they shall contain a reference to this Directive or shall be accompanied by such reference on the occasion of their official publication. The methods of making such reference shall be laid down by Member States.
2.   Member States shall communicate to the Commission the provisions of national law which they adopt or have already adopted in the field covered by this Directive.

Article 14

Entry into force
This Directive shall enter into force on the day of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union.

Article 15

Addressees
This Directive is addressed to the Member States.
