Article 7
Sustainable urban development
1.   The ERDF shall support, within operational programmes, sustainable urban development through strategies that set out integrated actions to tackle the economic, environmental, climate, demographic and social challenges affecting urban areas, while taking into account the need to promote urban-rural linkages.
2.   Sustainable urban development shall be undertaken through Integrated territorial investment as referred to in Article 36 of Regulation (EU) No 1303/2013, or through a specific operational programme, or through a specific priority axis in accordance with point (c) of the first subparagraph of Article 96(1) of Regulation (EU) No 1303 /2013.
3.   Taking into account its specific territorial situation, each Member State shall establish in its Partnership Agreement the principles for the selection of urban areas where integrated actions for sustainable urban development are to be implemented and an indicative allocation for those actions at national level.
4.   At least 5 % of the ERDF resources allocated at national level under the Investment for growth and jobs goal shall be allocated to integrated actions for sustainable urban development where cities, sub-regional or local bodies responsible for implementing sustainable urban strategies ("urban authorities") shall be responsible for tasks relating, at least, to the selection of operations in accordance with Article 123(6) of Regulation (EU) No 1303/2013, or, where appropriate, in accordance with Article 123(7) of that Regulation. The indicative amount to be dedicated for the purposes of paragraph 2 of this Article shall be set out in the operational programme or programmes concerned.
5.   The managing authority shall determine, in consultation with the urban authority, the scope of tasks, to be undertaken by urban authorities, concerning the management of integrated actions for sustainable urban development. The managing authority shall formally record its decision in writing. The managing authority may retain the right to undertake a final verification of eligibility of operations before approval.
