Article 12
Outermost regions
1.   Article 4 shall not apply to the specific additional allocation for the outermost regions. That allocation shall be used to offset the additional costs, linked to the special characteristics and constraints referred to in Article 349 TFEU, incurred in the outermost regions in supporting:
(a)
the thematic objectives set out in the first paragraph of Article 9 of Regulation (EU) No 1303/2013;
(b)
freight transport services and start-up aid for transport services;
(c)
operations linked to storage constraints, the excessive size and maintenance of production tools, and the lack of human capital in the local market.
2.   The specific additional allocation referred to in paragraph 1 may also be used to help finance operating aid and expenditure covering public service obligations and contracts in the outermost regions.
3.   The amount to which the rate of co-financing applies shall be proportionate to the additional costs, referred to in paragraph 1, incurred by the beneficiary, only in the case of operating aid and expenditure covering public service obligations and contracts, but may cover the total eligible costs in the case of expenditure for investment.
4.   The specific additional allocation referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article shall not be used to support:
(a)
operations involving products listed in Annex I to the TFEU;
(b)
aid for the transport of persons authorised under point (a) of Article 107(2) TFEU;
(c)
tax exemptions and exemption of social charges.
5.   By way of derogation from points (a) and (b) of Article 3(1), the ERDF may support productive investment in enterprises in the outermost regions, irrespective of the size of those enterprises.
6.   Article 4 shall not apply to the ERDF part of the envelope allocated to Mayotte as an outermost region within the meaning of Article 349 TFEU, and at least 50 % of that ERDF part shall be allocated to the thematic objectives set out in points 1, 2, 3, 4 and 6 of the first paragraph of Article 9 of Regulation (EU) No 1303 /2013.
