Article 3
General obligations of suppliers
1.   The supplier shall ensure that products that are placed on the market are accompanied, for each individual unit, free of charge, with accurate printed labels and with product information sheets in accordance with this Regulation and the relevant delegated acts.
As an alternative to supplying the product information sheet with the product, delegated acts referred to in point (h) of Article 16(3) may provide that it is sufficient for the supplier to enter the parameters of such product information sheet into the product database. In such a case, the supplier shall provide the product information sheet in printed form to the dealer on request.
Delegated acts may provide that the label is printed on the packaging of the product.
2.   The supplier shall deliver printed labels, including rescaled labels in accordance with Article 11(13), and product information sheets, to the dealer free of charge, promptly and in any event within five working days upon the dealer's request.
3.   The supplier shall ensure the accuracy of the labels and product information sheets that it provides and shall produce technical documentation sufficient to enable the accuracy to be assessed.
4.   Once a unit of a model is in service, the supplier shall request explicit consent from the customer regarding any changes intended to be introduced to the unit by means of updates that would be detrimental to the parameters of the energy efficiency label for that unit, as set out in the relevant delegated act. The supplier shall inform the customer of the objective of the update and of the changes in the parameters, including any change in the label class. For a period proportionate to the average lifespan of the product, the supplier shall give the customer the option of refusing the update without avoidable loss of functionality.
5.   The supplier shall not place on the market products that have been designed so that a model's performance is automatically altered in test conditions with the objective of reaching a more favourable level for any of the parameters specified in the relevant delegated act or included in any of the documentation provided with the product.
