Article 11
Procedure for the introduction and rescaling of labels
1.   As regards the product groups referred to in paragraphs 4 and 5, the Commission shall rescale labels which were in force on 1 August 2017 subject to paragraphs 4 and 5 and paragraphs 8 to 12.
By way of derogation from the requirement of achieving significant energy and cost savings set out in point (b) of Article 16(3), where the rescaling cannot achieve such savings, it shall ensure at least a homogenous A to G scale.
2.   Where a label does not exist for a product group on 1 August 2017, the Commission may, subject to paragraphs 8 to 12, introduce labels.
3.   The Commission may further rescale labels which have been rescaled in accordance with paragraph 1 or introduced in accordance with paragraph 2 where the conditions under point (a) or (b) of paragraph 6 are met, and subject to paragraphs 8 to 12.
4.   In order to ensure a homogenous A to G scale, the Commission shall adopt, by 2 August 2023, delegated acts pursuant to Article 16 of this Regulation in order to supplement this Regulation by introducing A to G rescaled labels for product groups covered by delegated acts adopted pursuant to Directive 2010/30/EU, with the aim of displaying the rescaled label both in shops and online, 18 months after the date of entry into force of the delegated acts adopted pursuant to this Regulation.
When determining the order of product groups to be rescaled, the Commission shall take into account the proportion of products in the highest classes.
5.   By way of derogation from paragraph 4, the Commission shall:
(a)
present reviews for the product groups covered by Delegated Regulations (EU) No 811/2013, (EU) No 812/2013 and (EU) 2015/1187 by 2 August 2025 with a view to rescaling them, and, where appropriate, shall, by 2 August 2026, adopt delegated acts pursuant to Article 16 of this Regulation in order to supplement this Regulation by introducing A to G rescaled labels.
In any event, the delegated acts introducing A to G rescaled labels shall be adopted no later than 2 August 2030.
(b)
adopt, by 2 November 2018, delegated acts pursuant to Article 16 of this Regulation in order to supplement this Regulation by introducing A to G rescaled labels for product groups covered by Commission Delegated Regulations (EU) No 1059/2010 (15), (EU) No 1060/2010 (16), (EU) No 1061/2010 (17), (EU) No 1062/2010 (18) and (EU) No 874/2012 (19) and Directive 96/60/EC, with the aim of displaying the rescaled label both in shops and online, 12 months after their date of entry into force.
6.   As regards the products for which the Commission may further rescale the labels in accordance with paragraph 3, the Commission shall review the label with a view to rescaling if it estimates that:
(a)
30 % of the units of models belonging to a product group sold within the Union market fall into the top energy efficiency class A and further technological development can be expected; or
(b)
50 % of the units of models belonging to a product group sold within the Union market fall into the top two energy efficiency classes A and B and further technological development can be expected.
7.   The Commission shall carry out a review study if it has estimated that the conditions of point (a) or (b) of paragraph 6 are met.
If, for a specific product group, those conditions are not met within eight years after the date of entry into force of the relevant delegated act, the Commission shall identify which barriers, if any, have prevented the label from fulfilling its role.
In the case of new labels it shall carry out a preparatory study based on the indicative list of product groups set out in the working plan.
The Commission shall finalise its review study, present the results and, where appropriate, a draft delegated act to the Consultation Forum within 36 months of the Commission estimating that the conditions referred to in point (a) or (b) of paragraph 6 are met. The Consultation Forum shall discuss the estimate and the review study.
8.   Where a label is introduced or rescaled, the Commission shall ensure that no products are expected to fall into energy class A at the moment of the introduction of the label and the estimated time within which a majority of models falls into that class is at least 10 years later.
9.   By way of derogation from paragraph 8, where technology is expected to develop more rapidly, requirements shall be laid down so that no products are expected to fall into energy classes A and B at the moment of the introduction of the label.
10.   Where, for a given product group, models belonging to energy class E, F or G are no longer allowed to be placed on the market or put into service because of an Ecodesign implementing measure adopted pursuant to Directive 2009/125/EC, the class or classes in question shall be shown on the label in grey as specified in the relevant delegated act. The label with the grey classes shall apply only to new product units placed on the market or put into service.
11.   Where, for technical reasons, it is impossible to define seven energy classes that correspond to significant energy and cost savings from a customer's perspective, the label may, by way of derogation from point (14) of Article 2, contain fewer classes. In such cases, the dark green to red spectrum of the label shall be retained.
12.   The Commission shall exercise the powers and obligations conferred on it by this Article in accordance with Article 16.
13.   Where, pursuant to paragraph 1 or 3, a label is rescaled:
(a)
the supplier shall, when placing a product on the market, provide both the existing and the rescaled labels and the product information sheets to the dealer for a period beginning four months before the date specified in the relevant delegated act for starting the display of the rescaled label.
By way of derogation from the first subparagraph of this point, if the existing and the rescaled label require different testing of the model, the supplier may choose not to supply the existing label with units of models placed on the market or put into service during the four-month period before the date specified in the relevant delegated act for starting the display of the rescaled label if no units belonging to the same model or equivalent models were placed on the market or put into service before the start of the four-month period. In that case, the dealer shall not offer those units for sale before that date. The supplier shall notify the dealer concerned of that consequence as soon as possible, including when it includes such units in its offers to dealers.
(b)
the supplier shall, for products placed on the market or put into service before the four-month period, deliver the rescaled label on request from the dealer in accordance with Article 3(2) as from the start of that period. For such products, the dealer shall obtain a rescaled label in accordance with Article 5(2).
By way of derogation from the first subparagraph of this point:
(i)
a dealer who is unable to obtain a rescaled label in accordance with the first subparagraph of this point for units already in its stock because the supplier has ceased its activities shall be permitted to sell those units exclusively with the non-rescaled label until nine months after the date specified in the relevant delegated act for starting the display of the rescaled label; or
(ii)
if the non-rescaled and the rescaled label require different testing of the model, the supplier is exempt from the obligation to supply a rescaled label for units placed on the market or put into service before the four month period, if no units belonging to same model or equivalent models are placed on the market or put into service after the start of the four-month period. In that case, the dealer shall be permitted to sell those units exclusively with the non-rescaled label until nine months after the date specified in the relevant delegated act for starting the display of the rescaled label.
(c)
the dealer shall replace the existing labels on products on display, both in shops and online, with the rescaled labels within 14 working days after the date specified in the relevant delegated act for starting the display of the rescaled label. The dealer shall not display the rescaled labels before that date.
By way of derogation from points (a), (b) and (c) of this paragraph, delegated acts referred to in point (e) of Article 16(3) may provide for specific rules for energy labels printed on the packaging.
