Article 9
Procedure at national level for dealing with products presenting a risk
1.   Where the market surveillance authorities of one Member State have sufficient reason to believe that a product covered by this Regulation presents a risk to aspects of public interest protection covered by this Regulation, such as environmental and consumer protection aspects, they shall carry out an evaluation in relation to the product concerned covering all energy labelling requirements relevant to the risk and laid down in this Regulation or in the relevant delegated act. Suppliers and dealers shall cooperate as necessary with the market surveillance authorities for the purpose of that evaluation.
2.   Where, in the course of the evaluation referred to in paragraph 1, the market surveillance authorities find that the product does not comply with the requirements laid down in this Regulation or in the relevant delegated act, they shall without delay require the supplier, or where appropriate, the dealer, to take all appropriate corrective action to bring the product into compliance with those requirements, where appropriate to withdraw the product from the market, or where appropriate, to recall it within a reasonable period, commensurate with the nature of the risk as they may prescribe.
Article 21 of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 shall apply to the measures referred to in this paragraph.
3.   Where the market surveillance authorities consider that a case of non-compliance as referred to in paragraph 2 is not restricted to their national territory, they shall inform the Commission and the other Member States of the results of the evaluation and of the action which they have required the supplier or dealer to take.
4.   The supplier or, where appropriate, the dealer shall ensure that all appropriate corrective or restrictive action in accordance with paragraph 2 is taken in respect of all the products concerned that it has made available on the market throughout the Union.
5.   Where the supplier or, where appropriate, the dealer does not take adequate corrective action within the period referred to in paragraph 2, the market surveillance authorities shall take all appropriate provisional measures to prohibit or restrict the availability of the product on their national market, to withdraw the product from that market, or to recall it.
6.   The market surveillance authorities shall inform the Commission and the other Member States without delay of the measures taken pursuant to paragraph 5. That information shall include all available details, in particular:
(a)
the data necessary for the identification of the non-compliant product;
(b)
the origin of the product;
(c)
the nature of the non-compliance alleged and the risk involved;
(d)
the nature and duration of the national measures taken and the arguments put forward by the supplier or, where appropriate, the dealer.
In particular, the market surveillance authorities shall indicate whether the non-compliance is due to either failure of the product to meet requirements relating to aspects of public interest protection laid down in this Regulation or shortcomings in the harmonised standards referred to in Article 13 conferring a presumption of conformity.
7.   Member States other than the Member State initiating the procedure shall without delay inform the Commission and the other Member States of any measures adopted and of any additional information at their disposal relating to the non-compliance of the product concerned, and, in the event of disagreement with the notified national measure, of their objections.
8.   Where, within 60 days of receipt of the information referred to in paragraph 6, no objection has been raised by either a Member State or the Commission in respect of a provisional measure taken by a Member State, that measure shall be deemed to be justified.
9.   Member States shall ensure that appropriate restrictive measures, such as withdrawal of the product from their market, are taken in respect of the product concerned, without delay.
