Article 4
Resources for European territorial cooperation goal
1.   Resources for the European territorial cooperation goal shall amount to 2,75 % of the global resources available for budgetary commitment from the ERDF, ESF and the Cohesion Fund for the 2014-2020 programming period and set out in Article 91(1) of Regulation (EU) No 1303/2013 (i.e., a total of EUR 8 948 259 330) and shall be allocated as follows:
(a)
74,05 % (i.e., a total of EUR 6 626 631 760) for cross-border cooperation;
(b)
20,36 % (i.e., a total of EUR 1 821 627 570) for transnational cooperation;
(c)
5,59 % (i.e., a total of EUR 500 000 000) for interregional cooperation.
2.   For programmes under the European territorial cooperation goal, the outermost regions shall be allocated not less than 150 % of the ERDF support they received in the 2007-2013 programming period for cooperation programmes. In addition, an amount of EUR 50 000 000 from the allocation for interregional cooperation shall be set aside for outermost regions' cooperation. Concerning thematic concentration, Article 6(1) shall apply to that additional allocation.
3.   The Commission shall communicate to each Member State its share of the global amounts for cross-border and transnational cooperation as referred to in points (a) and (b) of paragraph 1, broken down by year. Population size in the areas referred to in the second subparagraph of Article 3(1) and the first subparagraph of Article 3(3) shall be used as the criterion for the breakdown by Member State.
Based on the amounts communicated pursuant to the first subparagraph, each Member State shall inform the Commission whether, and how, it has used the transfer option provided for in Article 5 and the resulting distribution of funds among the cross-border and transnational programmes in which the Member State participates. The Commission shall, on the basis of the information provided by Member States, adopt a decision, by means of implementing acts, setting out a list of all cooperation programmes and indicating the global amount of the total ERDF support for each programme. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the advisory procedure referred to in Article 150(2) of Regulation (EU) No 1303/2013
4.   The contribution from the ERDF to cross-border and sea-basin programmes under the ENI and to the cross-border programmes under the IPA II shall be established by the Commission and the Member States concerned. The ERDF contribution established for each Member State shall not subsequently be reallocated between the Member States concerned.
5.   Support from the ERDF to individual cross-border and sea-basin programmes under the ENI and to the cross-border programmes under the IPA II shall be granted provided that at least equivalent amounts are provided by the ENI and the IPA II. That equivalence shall be subject to a maximum amount set out in the ENI legislative act or the IPA II legislative act.
6.   The annual appropriations corresponding to the support from the ERDF to cross-border and sea-basin programmes under the ENI and to the cross-border programmes under the IPA II shall be entered in the relevant budget lines of those instruments for the 2014 budgetary exercise.
7.   In 2015 and 2016, the annual contribution from the ERDF to the programmes under the ENI and the IPA II, for which no programme has been submitted to the Commission by 30 June under the cross-border and sea-basin programmes under the ENI, and under the cross-border programmes under the IPA II, and which has not been re-allocated to another programme submitted under the same category of external cooperation programmes, shall be allocated to the internal cross-border cooperation programmes under point (a) of paragraph 1 in which the Member State or Member States concerned participates or participate.
If by 30 June 2017, there are still cross-border and sea-basin programmes under the ENI and cross-border programmes under the IPA II which have not been submitted to the Commission, the entire contribution from the ERDF referred to in paragraph 4 to those programmes for the remaining years up to 2020, which has not been re-allocated to another adopted programme under the same category of external cooperation programmes, shall be allocated to the internal cross-border cooperation programmes under point (a) of paragraph 1 in which the Member State or Member States concerned participates or participate.
8.   Any cross-border and sea basin programmes, referred to in paragraph 4, adopted by the Commission shall be discontinued, or the allocation to the programmes shall be reduced, in accordance with the applicable rules and procedures, in particular if:
(a)
none of the partner countries covered by the programme have signed the relevant financing agreement by the deadline set out in accordance with the ENI legislative act or the IPA II legislative act; or
(b)
the programme cannot be implemented as planned due to problems in relations between the participating countries.
In such cases, the contribution from the ERDF referred to in paragraph 4 corresponding to annual instalments not yet committed, or annual instalments committed and de-committed totally or partially during the same budgetary year, which have not been re-allocated to another programme of the same category of external cooperation programmes, shall be allocated to the internal cross-border cooperation programmes under point (a) of paragraph 1 in which the Member State or Member States concerned participates or participate, at its or their request.
9.   The Commission shall provide an annual summary of the financial implementation of cross-border and sea-basin programmes under the ENI, and of cross-border programmes under the IPA II, to which the ERDF contributes in accordance with this Article, to the Committee established under Article 150(1) of Regulation (EU) No 1303/2013.
