Article 12
Selection of operations
1.   Operations under cooperation programmes shall be selected by a monitoring committee as referred to in Article 47 of Regulation (EU) No 1303/2013. That monitoring committee may set up a steering committee that acts under its responsibility for the selection of operations.
2.   Operations selected under cross-border and transnational cooperation shall involve beneficiaries from at least two participating countries, at least one of which shall be from a Member State. An operation may be implemented in a single country, provided that cross-border or transnational impacts and benefits are identified.
Operations under interregional cooperation referred to in point (3)(a) and (b) of Article 2 shall involve beneficiaries from at least three countries, at least two of which shall be Member States.
The conditions set out in the first subparagraph shall not apply to operations under the PEACE cross-border programme, between Northern Ireland and the border counties of Ireland, in support of peace and reconciliation as referred to in Article 7(2).
3.   Notwithstanding paragraph 2, an EGTC or other legal body established under the laws of one of the participating countries may be the sole beneficiary of an operation provided that it is set up by public authorities or bodies from at least two participating countries, in the case of cross-border and transnational cooperation, and from at least three participating countries, in the case of interregional cooperation.
A legal body that implements a financial instrument or a fund of funds, as applicable, may be the sole beneficiary of an operation without the application of the requirements for its composition set out in the first subparagraph.
4.   Beneficiaries shall cooperate in the development and implementation of operations. In addition, they shall cooperate in the staffing or the financing of operations, or in both.
For operations in programmes set up between outermost regions and third countries or territories, the beneficiaries shall be required to cooperate only in two of the fields mentioned in the first subparagraph.
5.   For each operation, the managing authority shall provide to the lead or sole beneficiary a document setting out the conditions for support of the operation, including the specific requirements concerning the products or services to be delivered under the operation, the financing plan, and the time-limit for execution.
