Article 20
Measures for manufacturers regarding modifications to the powertrain of vehicles
1.   Vehicle manufacturers shall equip L-category vehicles with the exception of subcategories L3e-A3 and L4e-A3, with designated features to prevent tampering of a vehicle’s powertrain, by means of a series of technical requirements and specifications with the aim:
(a)
to prevent modifications that may prejudice safety, in particular by increasing vehicle performance through tampering with the powertrain in order to increase the maximum torque and/or power and/or maximum design vehicle speed which have been duly established during the type-approval procedure as followed by the manufacturer of the vehicle; and/or
(b)
to prevent damage to the environment.
2.   The Commission shall adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 75 concerning the specific requirements regarding the measures referred to in paragraph 1 and in order to facilitate compliance with paragraph 4. The first such delegated acts shall be adopted by 31 December 2014.
3.   After a modification of the powertrain, a vehicle shall comply with the technical requirements of the initial vehicle category and subcategory, or, if applicable, the new vehicle category and subcategory, which were in force when the original vehicle was placed on the market, registered or entered into service, including the latest amendments to the requirements.
Where the vehicle manufacturer designs the powertrain of a vehicle type in such a way as to allow for its modification so that a vehicle no longer conforms to the approved type, but would correspond to an additional variant or version, the vehicle manufacturer shall include the relevant information for each variant or version so created in the application and each variant or version shall be explicitly type-approved. If the modified vehicle falls into a new category or subcategory, application shall be made for a new type-approval.
4.   Without prejudice to paragraph 1, in order to avoid modifications or adjustments with adverse effects on the functional safety or on the environmental performance of the vehicle, the manufacturer shall endeavour, through the use of best engineering practice, to prevent such modifications or adjustments from being technically possible, unless such modifications or adjustments are explicitly declared and contained in the information folder and thus covered by the type-approval.
