Article 22
Requirements for the functional safety of vehicles
1.   Manufacturers shall ensure that vehicles are designed, constructed and assembled so as to minimise the risk of injury to the vehicle occupants and to other road users.
2.   The manufacturer shall ensure that the functional safety of the vehicle shall endure throughout the normal life of the vehicle if used under normal conditions and serviced in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations. The manufacturer shall provide a statement in the information folder confirming that the endurance of the systems, parts and equipment critical for functional safety is ensured through appropriate testing and use of good engineering practice.
3.   Manufacturers shall ensure that vehicles, systems, components and separate technical units comply with the relevant requirements set out in Annexes II and VIII and comply with the test procedures and performance requirements as laid down in a delegated act adopted pursuant to paragraph 5.
4.   Components of vehicles, whose hazards of an electrical nature are covered by the delegated or implementing acts adopted pursuant to this Regulation, shall not be subject to Directive 2006/95/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 December 2006 on the harmonisation of the laws of Member States relating to electrical equipment designed for use within certain voltage limits (27).
5.   In order to ensure that a high level of functional safety is attained, the Commission shall adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 75 on the specific requirements listed in Annex II (B) regarding the functional safety of vehicles and where applicable, base itself on the enhanced functional safety requirements laid down in Annex VIII. The first such delegated acts shall be adopted by 31 December 2014.
6.   The Commission shall adopt in a second step by 31 December 2020 a delegated act in accordance with Article 75, in order to harmonise the normal life requirements and tests to ensure vehicle structure integrity as listed in Annex II (B) 17.
7.   The Commission may adopt implementing acts in order to lay down a template for the manufacturer’s statement. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 73(2).
