Article 15
Obligations of distributors concerning their products that are not in conformity or that present a serious risk
1.   Where distributors consider or have reason to believe that a vehicle, system, component or separate technical unit is not in conformity with the requirements of this Regulation, they shall not make available on the market, register or enter into service the vehicle, system, component or separate technical unit until it has been brought into conformity.
2.   Distributors who consider or have reason to believe that a vehicle, system, component or separate technical unit which they have made available on the market or registered or for which they are responsible for the entry into service, is not in conformity with this Regulation, shall inform the manufacturer or the manufacturer’s representative to ensure that the corrective measures necessary to bring that vehicle, system, component or separate technical unit into conformity or to recall it, if appropriate, are taken in accordance with Article 10(1) or Article 13(1).
3.   Where the vehicle, system, component, separate technical unit, part or equipment presents a serious risk, distributors shall immediately inform the manufacturer, the importer and the approval and market surveillance authorities of the Member States in which they made it available on the market. The distributor shall also inform them of any action taken and give details, in particular of the serious risk and of corrective measures taken by the manufacturer.
4.   Distributors shall, following a reasoned request from a national authority, ensure that the manufacturer provide the national authority with the information specified in Article 10(4) or that the importer provide the national authority with the information specified in Article 13(3). They shall cooperate with that authority, at its request, on any action taken in accordance with Article 20 of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 to eliminate the risks posed by the vehicle, system, component, separate technical unit, part or equipment which they have made available on the market.
