Article 30
Specific provisions concerning the EU type-approval certificate
1.   The EU type-approval certificate shall contain, as attachments, the following:
(a)
the information package referred to in Article 29(10);
(b)
the test results;
(c)
the name(s) and specimen(s) of the signature(s) of the person(s) authorised to sign certificates of conformity and a statement of their position in the company;
(d)
in the case of an EU whole-vehicle type-approval, a filled-out specimen of the certificate of conformity.
2.   The EU type-approval certificate shall be issued on the basis of the template laid down by the Commission by means of implementing acts. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 73(2). The first such implementing acts shall be adopted by 31 December 2014.
3.   In respect of each type of vehicle, the approval authority shall:
(a)
complete all the relevant sections of the EU type-approval certificate, including the test results sheet appended thereto;
(b)
compile the index to the information package;
(c)
issue the completed certificate, together with its attachments, to the applicant without delay.
The Commission shall lay down the template for the test results sheet referred to in point (a) by means of implementing acts. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 73(2). The first such implementing acts shall be adopted by 31 December 2014.
4.   In the case of an EU type-approval for which, in accordance with Article 40, restrictions have been imposed as to its validity, or certain provisions of this Regulation or the delegated and implementing acts adopted pursuant to this Regulation have been waived, the EU type-approval certificate shall specify those restrictions or waivers.
5.   Where the manufacturer chooses the mixed type-approval procedure, the approval authority shall complete the information package with the references to the test reports, established by the implementing acts referred to in Article 32(1), for which no EU type-approval certificate is available.
6.   Where the manufacturer chooses the single-step type-approval procedure, the approval authority shall establish a list of applicable requirements or acts and append that list to the EU type-approval certificate. The Commission shall adopt the template for such a list by means of implementing acts. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 73(2). The first such implementing acts shall be adopted by 31 December 2014.
