Article 12
Obligations of importers
1.   Importers shall place on the market only compliant vehicles, systems, components or separate technical units which have either received EU type-approval or which fulfil the requirements for national approval, or parts or equipment entirely subject to the requirements of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008.
2.   Before placing on the market a type-approved vehicle, system, component or separate technical unit, importers shall ensure that there is an information package complying with Article 29(10), and that the system, component or separate technical unit bears the required type-approval mark and complies with Article 9(8). In the case of a vehicle, the importer shall verify that the vehicle is accompanied by the required certificate of conformity.
3.   Where importers consider or have reason to believe that a vehicle, system, component or separate technical unit, part or equipment is not in conformity with the requirements of this Regulation, and in particular that it does not correspond to its type-approval, they shall not place on the market, allow to enter into service or register the vehicle, system, component or separate technical unit until it has been brought into conformity. Furthermore, where they consider or have reason to believe that the vehicle, system, component, separate technical unit, part or equipment presents a serious risk, they shall inform the manufacturer and the market surveillance authorities. For type-approved vehicles, systems, components and separate technical units they shall also inform the approval authority that has granted the approval to that effect.
4.   Importers shall indicate their name, registered trade name or registered trade mark and the address at which they can be contacted on the vehicle, system, component, separate technical unit, part or equipment, or, where this is not possible on its packaging or in a document accompanying the system, component, separate technical unit, part or equipment.
5.   Importers shall ensure that the vehicle, system, component or separate technical unit is accompanied by instructions and information, as required in accordance with Article 55, in the official language or languages of the Member States concerned.
6.   Importers shall ensure that, while a vehicle, system, component or separate technical unit is under their responsibility, storage or transport conditions do not jeopardise its compliance with the requirements set out in this Regulation.
7.   When deemed appropriate with regard to the serious risks presented by a vehicle, system, component, separate technical unit, part or equipment, importers shall, to protect the health and safety of consumers, investigate and, if necessary, keep a register of complaints and recalls of vehicles, systems, components, separate technical units, parts or equipment and keep distributors informed of such monitoring.
