Article 38
Certificate of conformity
1.   The manufacturer, in its capacity as the holder of a vehicle type-approval, shall deliver a certificate of conformity as a paper document to accompany each vehicle, whether complete, incomplete or completed, which is manufactured in conformity with the approved vehicle type.
Such a certificate shall be delivered free of charge to the buyer together with the vehicle. Its delivery may not be made dependent on an explicit request or the submission of additional information to the manufacturer.
For a period of 10 years after the production date of the vehicle the vehicle manufacturer shall, at the request of the vehicle owner, issue a duplicate of the certificate of conformity against a payment not exceeding the cost of issuing it. The word ‘duplicate’ shall be clearly visible on the face of any duplicate certificate.
2.   The manufacturer shall use the template for the certificate of conformity adopted by the Commission by means of implementing acts. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 73(2). The certificate of conformity shall be designed to prevent forgery. To that end, the implementing acts shall provide that the paper used in the certificate shall be protected by several security printing features. The first such implementing acts shall be adopted by 31 December 2014.
3.   The certificate of conformity shall be drawn up in at least one of the official languages of the Union. Any Member State may request the certificate of conformity to be translated into its own official language or languages.
4.   The person(s) authorised to sign certificates of conformity shall be in the manufacturer’s organisation and shall be duly authorised by the management to fully engage the legal responsibility of the manufacturer with respect to the design and the construction or to the conformity of the production of the vehicle.
5.   The certificate of conformity shall be completed in its entirety and shall not contain restrictions as regards the use of the vehicle other than those provided for in this Regulation or any of the delegated acts adopted pursuant to this Regulation.
6.   In the case of an incomplete or completed vehicle, the manufacturer shall fill in only those items of the certificate of conformity which have been added or changed at the current stage of approval and, if applicable, shall attach to the certificate all certificates of conformity delivered at the previous stages.
7.   The certificate of conformity shall, for vehicles approved in accordance with Article 40(2), display in its title the phrase ‘For complete/completed vehicles, type-approved in application of Article 40(4) of Regulation (EU) No 168/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 January 2013 on the approval and market surveillance of two- or three-wheel vehicles and quadricycles (provisional approval)’.
8.   The certificate of conformity, as set out in the implementing acts referred to in paragraph 2, shall, for vehicles type-approved in accordance with Article 42, display in its title the phrase ‘For complete/completed vehicles type-approved in small series’, and in close proximity thereto the year of production followed by a sequential number, between 1 and the limit indicated in the table in Annex III, denoting, in respect of each year of production, the position of that vehicle within the production allocated for that year.
9.   Without prejudice to paragraph 1, the manufacturer may transmit the certificate of conformity by electronic means to the registration authority of any Member State.
