Article 52
Recall of vehicles, systems, components or separate technical units
1.   Where a manufacturer who has been granted an EU whole-vehicle type-approval is obliged, in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 765/2008, to recall vehicles placed on the market, registered or for which the manufacturer was responsible for the entry into service, because a system, component or separate technical unit fitted to the vehicle presents a serious risk to safety, public health or environmental protection, whether or not duly approved in accordance with this Regulation, or because a part not subject to any specific requirements under type-approval legislation presents a serious risk to safety, public health or environmental protection, that manufacturer shall immediately inform the approval authority that granted the vehicle approval.
2.   Where a manufacturer of systems, components or separate technical units, who has been granted an EU type-approval is obliged, in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 765/2008, to recall systems, components or separate technical units which have been placed on the market or for which the manufacturer was responsible for the entry into service because they present a serious risk to safety, occupational safety, public health or environmental protection, whether or not duly approved in accordance with this Regulation, the manufacturer shall immediately inform the approval authority that granted the approval.
3.   The manufacturer shall propose to the approval authority a set of appropriate remedies to neutralise the serious risk referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2. The approval authority shall communicate the proposed remedies to the approval authorities of the other Member States without delay.
The approval authorities shall ensure that the remedies are effectively implemented in their respective Member States.
4.   If the remedies are considered to be insufficient or not implemented quickly enough by the approval authority concerned, it shall inform the approval authority that granted the EU type-approval without delay.
The approval authority that granted the EU type-approval shall then inform the manufacturer. If the manufacturer does not propose and implement effective corrective measures, the approval authority which granted the EU type-approval shall take all protective measures required, including the withdrawal of the EU type-approval. In the case of withdrawal of the EU type-approval, the approval authority shall within one month of such withdrawal notify the manufacturer, the approval authorities of the other Member States and the Commission by registered letter or equivalent electronic means.
