Article 7
Obligations of distributors
1.   Distributors shall only make available on the Union market transportable pressure equipment which is in conformity with the Annexes to Directive 2008/68/EC and with this Directive. Before making transportable pressure equipment available on the market distributors shall verify that the transportable pressure equipment bears the Pi marking, and that it is accompanied by the certificate of conformity and the contact address referred to in Article 6(3) of this Directive.
Where a distributor considers or has reason to believe that transportable pressure equipment is not in conformity with the Annexes to Directive 2008/68/EC or with this Directive, he shall not make the transportable pressure equipment available on the market until it has been brought into conformity. Furthermore, where the transportable pressure equipment presents a risk, the distributor shall inform the manufacturer or the importer to that effect as well as the market surveillance authorities.
2.   Distributors shall ensure that, while transportable pressure equipment is under their responsibility, storage or transport conditions do not jeopardise its compliance with the requirements set out in the Annexes to Directive 2008/68/EC.
3.   Distributors who consider or have reason to believe that transportable pressure equipment which they have made available on the market is not in conformity with the Annexes to Directive 2008/68/EC or with this Directive shall make sure that the corrective measures necessary to bring that transportable pressure equipment into conformity, to withdraw it or to recall it, if appropriate, are taken. Furthermore, where the transportable pressure equipment presents a risk, distributors shall immediately inform the manufacturer, the importer, where relevant, and the competent national authorities of the Member States in which they made the transportable pressure equipment available to that effect, giving details, in particular, of the non-compliance and of any corrective measures taken.
Distributors shall document all such instances of non-compliance and corrective measures.
4.   Distributors shall, further to a reasoned request from the competent national authority, provide it with all the information and documentation necessary to demonstrate the conformity of the transportable pressure equipment in a language easily understood by that authority. They shall cooperate with that authority, at its request, on any action taken to eliminate the risks posed by transportable pressure equipment which they have made available on the market.
5.   Distributors shall only provide information to operators which complies with the requirements set out in the Annexes to Directive 2008/68/EC and in this Directive.
