Article 14
General principles of the Pi marking
1.   The Pi marking shall only be affixed by the manufacturer or, in cases of reassessment of conformity, as set out in Annex III. For gas cylinders previously in compliance with Directives 84/525/EEC, 84/526/EEC or 84/527/EEC the Pi mark shall be affixed by or under the surveillance of the notified body.
2.   The Pi marking shall be affixed only to transportable pressure equipment which:
(a)
meets the conformity assessment requirements in the Annexes to Directive 2008/68/EC and in this Directive; or
(b)
meets the reassessment of conformity requirements referred to in Article 13.
It shall not be affixed to any other transportable pressure equipment.
3.   By affixing or having affixed the Pi marking, the manufacturer indicates that he takes responsibility for the conformity of the transportable pressure equipment with all applicable requirements set out in the Annexes to Directive 2008/68/EC and in this Directive.
4.   For the purposes of this Directive, the Pi marking shall be the only marking which attests conformity of the transportable pressure equipment with the applicable requirements set out in the Annexes to Directive 2008/68/EC and in this Directive.
5.   The affixing on transportable pressure equipment of markings, signs and inscriptions which are likely to mislead third parties as to the meaning or form of the Pi marking, shall be prohibited. Any other marking shall be affixed to the transportable pressure equipment in such a way that the visibility, legibility and meaning of the Pi marking are not thereby impaired.
6.   Demountable parts of refillable transportable pressure equipment with a direct safety function shall be Pi-marked.
7.   Member States shall ensure correct implementation of the rules governing the Pi marking and shall take appropriate action in the event of improper use of the marking. Member States shall also provide for penalties for infringements, which may include criminal sanctions for serious infringements. Those penalties shall be proportionate to the seriousness of the offence and constitute an effective deterrent against improper use.
