Article 4
Obligations of manufacturers
1.   When placing their transportable pressure equipment on the market, manufacturers shall ensure that the equipment has been designed, manufactured and documented in accordance with the requirements set out in the Annexes to Directive 2008/68/EC and in this Directive.
2.   Where the compliance of the transportable pressure equipment with the applicable requirements has been demonstrated through the conformity assessment process set out in the Annexes to Directive 2008/68/EC and in this Directive, manufacturers shall affix the Pi marking in accordance with Article 15 of this Directive.
3.   Manufacturers shall keep the technical documentation specified in the Annexes to Directive 2008/68/EC. This documentation shall be kept for the period specified therein.
4.   Manufacturers who consider or have reason to believe that transportable pressure equipment which they have placed on the market is not in conformity with the Annexes to Directive 2008/68/EC or with this Directive shall immediately take the corrective measures necessary to bring the transportable pressure equipment into conformity, to withdraw it or to recall it, if appropriate. Furthermore, where the transportable pressure equipment presents a risk, manufacturers shall immediately inform the competent national authorities of the Member States in which they made the transportable pressure equipment available to that effect, giving details, in particular, of the non-compliance and of any corrective measures taken.
5.   Manufacturers shall document all such instances of non-compliance and corrective measures.
6.   Manufacturers shall, further to a reasoned request from the competent national authority, provide it with all the information and documentation necessary to demonstrate the conformity of the transportable pressure equipment, in a language easily understood by that authority. They shall cooperate with that authority, at its request, as regards any action taken to eliminate the risks posed by transportable pressure equipment which they have placed on the market.
7.   Manufacturers shall only provide information to operators which complies with the requirements set out in the Annexes to Directive 2008/68/EC and in this Directive.
