Article 6
Obligations of importers
1.   Importers shall only place on the Union market transportable pressure equipment which is in conformity with the Annexes to Directive 2008/68/EC and with this Directive.
2.   Before placing transportable pressure equipment on the market, importers shall ensure that the appropriate conformity assessment procedure has been carried out by the manufacturer. They shall ensure that the manufacturer has drawn up the technical documentation and that the transportable pressure equipment bears the Pi marking and is accompanied by the certificate of conformity specified in the Annexes to Directive 2008/68/EC.
Where an importer considers or has reason to believe that the transportable pressure equipment is not in conformity with the Annexes to Directive 2008/68/EC or with this Directive, he shall not place the transportable pressure equipment on the market until it has been brought into conformity. Furthermore, where the transportable pressure equipment presents a risk, the importer shall inform the manufacturer and the market surveillance authorities to that effect.
3.   Importers shall indicate their name and the address at which they can be contacted either in, or attached to, the certificate of conformity specified in the Annexes to Directive 2008/68/EC.
4.   Importers shall ensure that, while transportable pressure equipment is under their responsibility, storage or transport conditions do not jeopardise its compliance with the requirements set out in the Annexes to Directive 2008/68/EC.
5.   Importers who consider or have reason to believe that transportable pressure equipment which they have placed on the market is not in conformity with the Annexes to Directive 2008/68/EC or with this Directive shall immediately take the corrective measures necessary to bring the transportable pressure equipment into conformity, to withdraw it or to recall it, if appropriate. Furthermore, where the transportable pressure equipment presents a risk, importers shall immediately inform the manufacturer and the competent national authorities of the Member States in which they made the transportable pressure equipment available to that effect, giving details, in particular, of the non-compliance and of any corrective measures taken.
Importers shall document all such instances of non-compliance and corrective measures.
6.   Importers shall, for at least the period specified in the Annexes to Directive 2008/68/EC for manufacturers, keep a copy of the technical documentation at the disposal of the market surveillance authorities and ensure that the technical documentation can be made available to those authorities upon request.
7.   Importers shall, further to a reasoned request from the competent national authority, provide it with all the information and documentation necessary to demonstrate the conformity of the transportable pressure equipment, in a language easily understood by that authority. They shall cooperate with that authority, at its request, on any action taken to eliminate the risks posed by transportable pressure equipment which they have placed on the market.
8.   Importers shall only provide information to operators which complies with the requirements set out in the Annexes to Directive 2008/68/EC and in this Directive.
