Whereas:
(1)
Inland waterways are an important part of the Community's transport networks and the promotion of inland waterways transport is one of the objectives of the common transport policy, both for reasons of economic efficiency and in order to reduce energy consumption and the environmental impact of transport, as described in the Commission White Paper: European transport policy for 2010: time to decide.
(2)
The Commission needs statistics concerning the transport of goods by inland waterways in order to monitor and develop the common transport policy, as well as the transport elements of policies on the regions and on trans-European networks.
(3)
Statistics on inland waterways transport have been collected under Council Directive 80/1119/EEC of 17 November 1980 on statistical returns in respect of carriage of goods by inland waterways (2), which no longer corresponds to the present needs in this domain. It is therefore appropriate to replace that Directive with a new instrument which extends its scope and improves its efficiency.
(4)
Consequently, Directive 80/1119/EEC should be repealed.
(5)
Community statistics on all modes of transport should be collected according to common concepts and standards, with the aim of achieving the fullest practicable comparability between transport modes.
(6)
Inland waterways transport does not occur in all Member States and, therefore, the effect of this Regulation is limited to those Member States where this mode of transport exists.
(7)
Since the objective of this Regulation, namely the creation of common statistical standards that permit the production of harmonised data, cannot be sufficiently achieved by the Member States and can therefore be better achieved at Community level, the Community may adopt measures, in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity as set out in Article 5 of the Treaty. In accordance with the principle of proportionality, as set out in that Article, this Regulation does not go beyond what is necessary in order to achieve that objective.
(8)
Council Regulation (EC) No 322/97 of 17 February 1997 on Community Statistics (3) provides a reference framework for the provisions laid down by this Regulation.
(9)
The measures necessary for the implementation of this Regulation should be adopted in accordance with Council Decision 1999/468/EC of 28 June 1999 laying down the procedures for the exercise of implementing powers conferred on the Commission (4).
(10)
The Statistical Programme Committee established by Council Decision 89/382/EEC, Euratom (5) has been consulted in accordance with Article 3 of that Decision,
HAVE ADOPTED THIS REGULATION:
