Article 12
Clearance of the pre-financing of the remaining provisional allocation and calculation of the additional amounts due to Member States
1.   The Commission shall assess the application referred to in Article 11 and shall satisfy itself that the application is complete, accurate and true. When calculating the financial contribution from the Reserve due to the Member State, the Commission shall exclude from Union financing expenditure for measures which were implemented or for which disbursements have been made in breach of applicable law.
2.   Based on its assessment, the Commission shall, by means of an implementing act, establish the following:
(a)
the amount of eligible expenditure accepted;
(b)
the amount of technical assistance calculated in accordance with Article 6(2);
(c)
the sum of the amounts referred to in points (a) and (b) (‘total accepted amount’);
(d)
whether the amount provisionally allocated in accordance with the implementing act under Article 4(5) (‘provisional allocation’) is due to the Member State in accordance with paragraph 3 of this Article, or whether amounts need to be recovered pursuant to paragraph 6 of this Article.
3.   Where the total accepted amount exceeds the amount of pre-financing paid, an amount shall be due to that Member State from the allocation referred to in Article 4(3), point (b), up to the amount of the provisional allocation for that Member State.
4.   With regard to the amounts due pursuant to paragraph 3 of this Article, the implementing act referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article shall constitute a financing decision within the meaning of Article 110(1) of the Financial Regulation and the legal commitment within the meaning of that Regulation.
5.   The Commission shall clear the pre-financing and pay any amount due to Member States within 30 days of adoption of the implementing act referred to in paragraph 2.
6.   The Commission shall make any unused resources from the provisional allocations available as additional payments by increasing proportionately the financial contribution from the Reserve to Member States whose total accepted amount exceeds their provisional allocation. The unused resources shall consist of amounts carried over pursuant to Article 9(4), the remaining part of the provisional allocation of a Member State whose total accepted amount is lower than its provisional allocation and amounts resulting from recoveries carried out pursuant to the second subparagraph of this paragraph.
Where the total accepted amount is lower than the pre-financing paid to the Member State concerned, the difference shall be recovered in accordance with the Financial Regulation. The recovered amounts shall be treated as internal assigned revenue in accordance with Article 21(3), point (b), of the Financial Regulation.
Where the sum of the additional amounts calculated for all Member States whose total accepted amount exceeds their provisional allocation is higher than the resources available according to the first subparagraph, the financial contributions from the Reserve for the amounts exceeding the provisional allocations shall be reduced proportionately.
Where the additional payments to Member States whose total accepted amount exceeds their provisional allocation have been made at a rate of 100 %, any remaining amount shall be returned to the Union budget.
7.   The Commission shall, by means of an implementing act, set out the additional amounts due pursuant to the first subparagraph of paragraph 6 of this Article. That implementing act shall constitute a financing decision within the meaning of Article 110(1) of the Financial Regulation and the legal commitment within the meaning of that Regulation. The Commission shall pay any additional amount due within 30 days of adoption of that implementing act.
8.   Prior to the adoption of the implementing acts referred to in paragraphs 2 and 7, the Commission shall inform the Member State concerned of its assessment and invite that Member State to submit its observations within 2 months of informing the Member State of its assessment.
