Article 14
Management and control
1.   When executing tasks relating to the implementation of the Reserve, Member States shall take all the necessary measures, including legislative, regulatory and administrative measures, to protect the financial interests of the Union, namely by:
(a)
designating a body or, where required by the Member State constitutional framework, bodies responsible for the management of the financial contribution from the Reserve and an independent audit body in accordance with Article 63(3) of the Financial Regulation, and supervising such bodies;
(b)
setting up management and control systems for the Reserve in accordance with the principles of sound financial management and ensuring that those systems function effectively;
(c)
drawing up a description of the management and control systems for the Reserve in accordance with the template set out in Annex III, keeping the description up to date and making it available to the Commission on request;
(d)
notifying the Commission of the identity of the designated body or bodies and of the body to which the pre-financing shall be paid, and confirming that the descriptions of the management and control systems for the Reserve have been drawn up, by 10 December 2021;
(e)
ensuring that expenditure supported under other Union funds and programmes is not included for support from the Reserve;
(f)
preventing, detecting and correcting irregularities and fraud, and avoiding conflict of interest; those actions comprise the collection of information on the beneficial owners of the recipients of funding in accordance with point 4(a) of Annex III; the rules related to the collection and processing of such data shall comply with applicable data protection rules;
(g)
cooperating with the Commission, OLAF, the Court of Auditors and, in respect of those Member States participating in enhanced cooperation, the EPPO pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2017/1939.
The use of and access to the data referred to in point (f) shall be limited to the bodies referred to in point (a), the Commission, OLAF, the Court of Auditors and, in respect of those Member States participating in enhanced cooperation pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2017/1939, to the EPPO.
Member States and the Commission shall be allowed to process personal data only where it is necessary for the purpose of meeting their respective obligations under this Regulation and shall process personal data in accordance with Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council (21) or Regulation (EU) 2018/1725, whichever is applicable.
2.   For the purposes of paragraph 1, points (a) and (b), Member States may make use of bodies, at the appropriate territorial level, and management and control systems already in place for the implementation of cohesion policy funding or the European Union Solidarity Fund.
3.   The body or bodies responsible for the management of the financial contribution from the Reserve shall:
(a)
ensure the functioning of an effective and efficient internal control system;
(b)
establish criteria and procedures for the selection of measures to be financed and determine the conditions for a financial contribution from the Reserve;
(c)
verify that the measures financed from the Reserve are implemented in accordance with applicable law and the conditions for a financial contribution from the Reserve, and that the expenditure is based on verifiable supporting documents;
(d)
establish effective measures to avoid double funding of the same costs by the Reserve and other sources of Union funding;
(e)
ensure ex post publication in accordance with Article 38(2) to (6) of the Financial Regulation;
(f)
use an accounting system to record and store electronically data on the expenditure incurred to be covered by the financial contribution from the Reserve that provides accurate, complete and reliable information in a timely manner;
(g)
keep available all supporting documents regarding expenditure to be covered by the financial contribution from the Reserve for a period of 5 years following the deadline for submission of the application for a financial contribution from the Reserve, and include that obligation in agreements with other entities involved in the implementation of the Reserve;
(h)
for the purposes of paragraph 1, point (f), collect information in an electronic standardised format to allow for the identification of recipients of a financial contribution from the Reserve and their beneficial owners in accordance with Annex III.
4.   The independent audit body shall audit the management and control system for the Reserve and carry out audits of financed measures in order to provide independent assurance to the Commission regarding the effective functioning of that system and the legality and regularity of the expenditure included in the accounts submitted to the Commission.
The audit work shall be carried out in accordance with internationally accepted audit standards.
The audits of financed measures shall cover expenditure on the basis of a sample. That sample shall be representative and based on statistical sampling methods.
Where the population consists of less than 300 sampling units, a non-statistical sampling method may be used based on the professional judgement of the independent audit body. In such cases, the size of the sample shall be sufficient to enable the independent audit body to draw up a valid audit opinion. The non-statistical sampling method shall cover a minimum of 10 % of the sampling units in the population of the reference period, selected randomly.
5.   The Commission may carry out on-the-spot audits at the premises of any entity involved in the implementation of the Reserve with regard to the measures financed from the Reserve and shall have access to the supporting documents regarding the expenditure to be covered by the financial contribution from the Reserve.
6.   The Commission shall pay particular attention to the establishment of the management and control system for the Reserve where Member States do not make use of existing bodies designated for the implementation of cohesion policy funding or the European Union Solidarity Fund. If risks are identified, the Commission shall carry out an assessment to ensure that the management and control system for the Reserve functions effectively in ensuring the protection of the financial interests of the Union. The Commission shall inform the Member State concerned of its provisional conclusions and invite that Member State to submit its observations within 2 months of informing the Member State of its provisional conclusions.
