Article 16
Nanomaterials
1.   For every cosmetic product that contains nanomaterials, a high level of protection of human health shall be ensured.
2.   The provisions of this Article do not apply to nanomaterials used as colorants, UV-filters or preservatives regulated under Article 14, unless expressly specified.
3.   In addition to the notification under Article 13, cosmetic products containing nanomaterials shall be notified to the Commission by the responsible person by electronic means six months prior to being placed on the market, except where they have already been placed on the market by the same responsible person before 11 January 2013.
In the latter case, cosmetic products containing nanomaterials placed on the market shall be notified to the Commission by the responsible person between 11 January 2013 and 11 July 2013 by electronic means, in addition to the notification in Article 13.
The first and the second subparagraphs shall not apply to cosmetic products containing nanomaterials that are in conformity with the requirements set out in Annex III.
The information notified to the Commission shall contain at least the following:
(a)
the identification of the nanomaterial including its chemical name (IUPAC) and other descriptors as specified in point 2 of the Preamble to Annexes II to VI;
(b)
the specification of the nanomaterial including size of particles, physical and chemical properties;
(c)
an estimate of the quantity of nanomaterial contained in cosmetic products intended to be placed on the market per year;
(d)
the toxicological profile of the nanomaterial;
(e)
the safety data of the nanomaterial relating to the category of cosmetic product, as used in such products;
(f)
the reasonably foreseeable exposure conditions.
The responsible person may designate another legal or natural person by written mandate for the notification of nanomaterials and shall inform the Commission thereof.
The Commission shall provide a reference number for the submission of the toxicological profile, which may substitute the information to be notified under point (d).
4.   In the event that the Commission has concerns regarding the safety of a nanomaterial, the Commission shall, without delay, request the SCCS to give its opinion on the safety of such nanomaterial for use in the relevant categories of cosmetic products and on the reasonably foreseeable exposure conditions. The Commission shall make this information public. The SCCS shall deliver its opinion within six months of the Commission's request. Where the SCCS finds that any necessary data is lacking, the Commission shall request the responsible person to provide such data within an explicitly stated reasonable time, which shall not be extended. The SCCS shall deliver its final opinion within six months of submission of additional data. The opinion of the SCCS shall be made publicly available.
5.   The Commission may, at any time, invoke the procedure in paragraph 4 where it has any safety concerns, for example due to new information supplied by a third party.
6.   Taking into account the opinion of the SCCS, and where there is a potential risk to human health, including when there is insufficient data, the Commission may amend Annexes II and III.
7.   The Commission may, taking into account technical and scientific progress, amend paragraph 3 by adding requirements.
8.   The measures, referred to in paragraphs 6 and 7, designed to amend non-essential elements of this Regulation, shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 32(3).
9.   On imperative grounds of urgency the Commission may use the procedure referred to in Article 32(4).
10.   The following information shall be made available by the Commission:
(a)
By 11 January 2014, the Commission shall make available a catalogue of all nanomaterials used in cosmetic products placed on the market, including those used as colorants, UV-filters and preservatives in a separate section, indicating the categories of cosmetic products and the reasonably foreseeable exposure conditions. This catalogue shall be regularly updated thereafter and be made publicly available.
(b)
The Commission shall submit to the European Parliament and the Council an annual status report, which will give information on developments in the use of nanomaterials in cosmetic products within the Community, including those used as colorants, UV-filters and preservatives in a separate section. The first report shall be presented by 11 July 2014 The report update shall summarise, in particular, the new nanomaterials in new categories of cosmetic products, the number of notifications, the progress made in developing nano-specific assessment methods and safety assessment guides, and information on international cooperation programmes.
11.   The Commission shall regularly review the provisions of this Regulation concerning nanomaterials in the light of scientific progress and shall, where necessary, propose suitable amendments to those provisions.
The first review shall be undertaken by 11 July 2018.
