Article 15
Substances classified as CMR substances
1.   The use in cosmetic products of substances classified as CMR substances, of category 2, under Part 3 of Annex VI to Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008 shall be prohibited. However, a substance classified in category 2 may be used in cosmetic products where the substance has been evaluated by the SCCS and found safe for use in cosmetic products. To these ends the Commission shall adopt the necessary measures in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 32(3) of this Regulation.
2.   The use in cosmetic products of substances classified as CMR substances, of category 1A or 1B under Part 3 of Annex VI to Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008 shall be prohibited.
However, such substances may be used in cosmetic products by way of exception where, subsequent to their classification as CMR substances of category 1A or 1B under Part 3 of Annex VI to Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008, all of the following conditions are fulfilled:
(a)
they comply with the food safety requirements as defined in Regulation (EC) No 178/2002 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 28 January 2002 laying down the general principles and requirements of food law, establishing the European Food Safety Authority and laying down procedures in matters of food safety (14);
(b)
there are no suitable alternative substances available, as documented in an analysis of alternatives;
(c)
the application is made for a particular use of the product category with a known exposure; and
(d)
they have been evaluated and found safe by the SCCS for use in cosmetic products, in particular in view of exposure to these products and taking into consideration the overall exposure from other sources, taking particular account of vulnerable population groups.
Specific labelling in order to avoid misuse of the cosmetic product shall be provided in accordance with Article 3 of this Regulation, taking into account possible risks linked to the presence of hazardous substances and the routes of exposure.
In order to implement this paragraph, the Commission shall amend the Annexes to this Regulation in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 32(3) of this Regulation within 15 months of the inclusion of the substances concerned in Part 3 of Annex VI to Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008.
On imperative grounds of urgency, the Commission may use the urgency procedure referred to in Article 32(4) of this Regulation.
The Commission shall mandate the SCCS to re-evaluate those substances as soon as safety concerns arise, and at the latest five years after their inclusion in Annexes III to VI to this Regulation, and at least every subsequent five years.
3.   By 11 January 2012, the Commission shall ensure that appropriate guidance is developed with the aim of enabling a harmonised approach to the development and use of overall exposure estimates in assessing the safe use of CMR substances. This guidance shall be developed in consultation with the SCCS, the ECHA, the EFSA and other relevant stakeholders, drawing, as appropriate, on relevant best practice.
4.   When Community or internationally agreed criteria for identifying substances with endocrine-disrupting properties are available, or at the latest on 11 January 2015, the Commission shall review this Regulation with regard to substances with endocrine-disrupting properties.
