Article 18
Animal testing
1.   Without prejudice to the general obligations deriving from Article 3, the following shall be prohibited:
(a)
the placing on the market of cosmetic products where the final formulation, in order to meet the requirements of this Regulation, has been the subject of animal testing using a method other than an alternative method after such alternative method has been validated and adopted at Community level with due regard to the development of validation within the OECD;
(b)
the placing on the market of cosmetic products containing ingredients or combinations of ingredients which, in order to meet the requirements of this Regulation, have been the subject of animal testing using a method other than an alternative method after such alternative method has been validated and adopted at Community level with due regard to the development of validation within the OECD;
(c)
the performance within the Community of animal testing of finished cosmetic products in order to meet the requirements of this Regulation;
(d)
the performance within the Community of animal testing of ingredients or combinations of ingredients in order to meet the requirements of this Regulation, after the date on which such tests are required to be replaced by one or more validated alternative methods listed in Commission Regulation (EC) No 440/2008 of 30 May 2008 laying down test methods pursuant to Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council on the Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals (REACH) (15) or in Annex VIII to this Regulation.
2.   The Commission, after consulting the SCCS and the European Centre for the Validation of Alternative Methods (ECVAM) and with due regard to the development of validation within the OECD, has established timetables for the implementation of the provisions under points (a), (b) and (d) of paragraph 1, including deadlines for the phasing-out of the various tests. The timetables were made available to the public on 1 October 2004 and sent to the European Parliament and the Council. The period for implementation was limited to 11 March 2009 in relation to points (a), (b) and (d) of paragraph 1.
In relation to the tests concerning repeated-dose toxicity, reproductive toxicity and toxicokinetics, for which there are no alternatives yet under consideration, the period for implementation of paragraph 1(a) and (b) shall be limited to 11 March 2013.
The Commission shall study possible technical difficulties in complying with the ban in relation to tests, in particular those concerning repeated-dose toxicity, reproductive toxicity and toxicokinetics, for which there are no alternatives yet under consideration. Information about the provisional and final results of these studies forms part of the yearly reports presented pursuant to Article 35.
On the basis of these annual reports, the timetables established as referred to in the first subparagraph, could be adapted up to 11 March 2009 in relation to the first subparagraph and may be adapted up to 11 March 2013 in relation to the second subparagraph and after consultation of the entities referred to in the first subparagraph.
The Commission shall study progress and compliance with the deadlines as well as possible technical difficulties in complying with the ban. Information about the provisional and final results of the Commission studies forms part of the yearly reports presented pursuant to Article 35. If these studies conclude, at the latest two years prior to the end of the maximum period referred to in the second subparagraph, that for technical reasons one or more tests referred to in that subparagraph will not be developed and validated before the expiry of the period referred to therein it shall inform the European Parliament and the Council and shall put forward a legislative proposal in accordance with Article 251 of the Treaty.
In exceptional circumstances, where serious concerns arise as regards the safety of an existing cosmetic ingredient, a Member State may request the Commission to grant a derogation from paragraph 1. The request shall contain an evaluation of the situation and indicate the measures necessary. On this basis, the Commission may, after consulting the SCCS and by means of a reasoned decision, authorise the derogation. That authorisation shall lay down the conditions associated with this derogation in terms of specific objectives, duration and reporting of the results.
A derogation shall be granted only where:
(a)
the ingredient is in wide use and cannot be replaced by another ingredient capable of performing a similar function;
(b)
the specific human health problem is substantiated and the need to conduct animal tests is justified and is supported by a detailed research protocol proposed as the basis for the evaluation.
The decision on the authorisation, the conditions associated with it and the final result achieved shall be part of the annual report presented by the Commission in accordance with Article 35.
The measures referred to in the sixth subparagraph, designed to amend non-essential elements of this Regulation, shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 32(3).
3.   For the purposes of this Article and Article 20:
(a)
‘finished cosmetic product’ means the cosmetic product in its final formulation, as placed on the market and made available to the end user, or its prototype;
(b)
‘prototype’ means a first model or design that has not been produced in batches, and from which the finished cosmetic product is copied or finally developed.
