Article 13
Notification
1.   Prior to placing the cosmetic product on the market the responsible person shall submit, by electronic means, the following information to the Commission:
(a)
the category of cosmetic product and its name or names, enabling its specific identification;
(b)
the name and address of the responsible person where the product information file is made readily accessible;
(c)
the country of origin in the case of import;
(d)
the Member State in which the cosmetic product is to be placed on the market;
(e)
the contact details of a physical person to contact in the case of necessity;
(f)
the presence of substances in the form of nanomaterials and:
(i)
their identification including the chemical name (IUPAC) and other descriptors as specified in point 2 of the Preamble to Annexes II to VI to this Regulation;
(ii)
the reasonably foreseeable exposure conditions;
(g)
the name and the Chemicals Abstracts Service (CAS) or EC number of substances classified as carcinogenic, mutagenic or toxic for reproduction (CMR), of category 1A or 1B, under Part 3 of Annex VI to Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008;
(h)
the frame formulation allowing for prompt and appropriate medical treatment in the event of difficulties.
The first subparagraph shall also apply to cosmetic products notified under Directive 76/768/EEC.
2.   When the cosmetic product is placed on the market, the responsible person shall notify to the Commission the original labelling, and, where reasonably legible, a photograph of the corresponding packaging.
3.   As from 11 July 2013, a distributor who makes available in a Member State a cosmetic product already placed on the market in another Member State and translates, on his own initiative, any element of the labelling of that product in order to comply with national law, shall submit, by electronic means, the following information to the Commission:
(a)
the category of cosmetic product, its name in the Member State of dispatch and its name in the Member State in which it is made available, enabling its specific identification;
(b)
the Member State in which the cosmetic product is made available;
(c)
his name and address;
(d)
the name and address of the responsible person where the product information file is made readily accessible..
4.   Where a cosmetic product has been placed on the market before 11 July 2013 but is no longer placed on the market as from that date, and a distributor introduces that product in a Member State after that date, that distributor shall communicate the following to the responsible person:
(a)
the category of cosmetic product, its name in the Member State of dispatch and its name in the Member State in which it is made available, enabling its specific identification;
(b)
the Member State in which the cosmetic product is made available;
(c)
his name and address.
On the basis of that communication, the responsible person shall submit to the Commission, by electronic means, the information referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article, where notifications according to Article 7(3) and Article 7a (4) of Directive 76/768/EEC have not been carried out in the Member State in which the cosmetic product is made available.
5.   The Commission shall, without delay, make the information referred to in points (a) to (g) of paragraph 1, and in paragraphs 2 and 3 available electronically to all competent authorities.
That information may be used by competent authorities only for the purposes of market surveillance, market analysis, evaluation and consumer information in the context of Articles 25, 26 and 27.
6.   The Commission shall, without delay, make the information referred to in paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 available electronically to poison centres or similar bodies, where such centres or bodies have been established by Member States.
That information may be used by those bodies only for the purposes of medical treatment.
7.   Where any of the information set out in paragraphs 1, 3 and 4 changes, the responsible person or the distributor shall provide an update without delay.
8.   The Commission may, taking into account technical and scientific progress and specific needs related to market surveillance, amend paragraphs 1 to 7 by adding requirements.
Those measures, designed to amend non-essential elements of this Regulation, shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 32(3).
