Article 10
Safety assessment
1.   In order to demonstrate that a cosmetic product complies with Article 3, the responsible person shall, prior to placing a cosmetic product on the market, ensure that the cosmetic product has undergone a safety assessment on the basis of the relevant information and that a cosmetic product safety report is set up in accordance with Annex I.
The responsible person shall ensure that:
(a)
the intended use of the cosmetic product and the anticipated systemic exposure to individual ingredients in a final formulation are taken into account in the safety assessment;
(b)
an appropriate weight-of-evidence approach is used in the safety assessment for reviewing data from all existing sources;
(c)
the cosmetic product safety report is kept up to date in view of additional relevant information generated subsequent to placing the product on the market.
The first subparagraph shall also apply to cosmetic products that have been notified under Directive 76/768/EEC.
The Commission, in close cooperation with all stakeholders, shall adopt appropriate guidelines to enable undertakings, in particular small and medium-sized enterprises, to comply with the requirements laid down in Annex I. Those guidelines shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure referred to in Article 32(2).
2.   The cosmetic product safety assessment, as set out in Part B of Annex I shall be carried out by a person in possession of a diploma or other evidence of formal qualifications awarded on completion of a university course of theoretical and practical study in pharmacy, toxicology, medicine or a similar discipline, or a course recognised as equivalent by a Member State.
3.   Non-clinical safety studies referred to in the safety assessment according to paragraph 1 and carried out after 30 June 1988 for the purpose of assessing the safety of a cosmetic product shall comply with Community legislation on the principles of good laboratory practice, as applicable at the time of performance of the study, or with other international standards recognised as being equivalent by the Commission or the ECHA.
