Whereas:
(1)
Environmental protection is one of the key dimensions of sustainable development of the European Union. It is a priority for Community co-financing and should be funded primarily through the Community's horizontal financial instruments, including the European Regional Development Fund, the European Social Fund, the Cohesion Fund, the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development, the Competitiveness and Innovation Framework Programme, the European Fisheries Fund and the Seventh Framework Programme for research, technological development and demonstration activities.
(2)
These Community financial instruments do not cover all environmental priorities. There is therefore a need for a Financial Instrument for the Environment (LIFE+) to provide specific support for developing and implementing Community environmental policy and legislation, in particular the objectives of the Sixth Community Environment Action Programme (6th EAP) laid down by Decision No 1600/2002/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 July 2002 (4).
(3)
Support should be provided through grant agreements and public procurement contracts in accordance with Council Regulation (EC, Euratom) No 1605/2002 of 25 June 2002 on the Financial Regulation applicable to the general budget of the European Communities (5).
(4)
Projects financed under LIFE+ should meet eligibility criteria to secure the best possible use of Community funds, to ensure European added value and to avoid financing recurring activities, such as day-to-day operations. This should not prevent the financing of innovative or demonstration projects.
(5)
In the area of nature and biodiversity, the implementation of Community policy and legislation itself provides a framework for European added value. Best-practice or demonstration projects, including those relating to the management and designation of Natura 2000 sites in accordance with Council Directive 92/43/EEC of 21 May 1992 on the conservation of natural habitats and of wild fauna and flora (6) and Council Directive 79/409/EEC of 2 April 1979 on the conservation of wild birds (7), should be eligible for Community financing under LIFE+, except where they are eligible for funding under other Community financial instruments.
(6)
Arrangements should be established to ensure adequate financing for the Natura 2000 network, including Community co-financing. Since the aim of this Regulation is to finance only best-practice or demonstration projects related to the management of Natura 2000 sites, the Commission and Member States should ensure that sufficient funds are made available through other instruments for the management of the network, the annual cost of which was estimated in 2004 to be around EUR 6 100 million.
(7)
Innovative or demonstration projects relating to Community environmental objectives, including the development or dissemination of best practice techniques, know-how or technologies, as well as projects for awareness-raising campaigns and special training for agents involved in forest fire prevention initiatives should be eligible for Community financing under LIFE+, except where they are eligible for funding under other Community financial instruments.
(8)
Projects for the development and implementation of Community objectives relating to the broad-based, harmonised, comprehensive and long-term monitoring of forests and environmental interactions should be eligible for Community financing under LIFE+, except where they are eligible for funding under other Community financial instruments.
(9)
The challenge of effective policy development and implementation under the 6th EAP can be met only through support for best-practice or demonstration projects for the development or implementation of Community environmental policy; demonstration of innovative policy approaches, technologies, methods and instruments; consolidating the knowledge base; building implementation capacity; fostering good governance, promoting networking, mutual learning and the exchange of best practice; and improved dissemination of information, awareness-raising and communication. Financial support under this Regulation should therefore contribute to the development, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of environmental policy and legislation, as well as its communication and dissemination throughout the Community.
(10)
LIFE+ should have three components: LIFE+ Nature and Biodiversity, LIFE+ Environment Policy and Governance, and LIFE+ Information and Communication. It should be possible for projects financed by LIFE+ to contribute to the achievement of the specific objectives of more than one of these three components and to involve the participation of more than one Member State, as well as to contribute to the development of strategic approaches to meeting environmental objectives.
(11)
In order to carry out its role in the initiation of environmental policy development and implementation, the Commission should use resources from LIFE+ to complete studies and evaluations, to undertake services with a view to the implementation and integration of environmental policy and legislation, to hold meetings, seminars and workshops with experts and stakeholders, to develop and maintain networks and to develop and maintain computer systems. In addition, the Commission should use part of the LIFE+ budget to undertake information, publication and dissemination activities, including events, exhibitions and similar awareness-raising measures, for the preparation and production costs of audio-visual materials, and to obtain technical and/or administrative assistance relating to the identification, preparation, management, monitoring, audit and supervision of programmes and projects.
(12)
Non-governmental organisations (NGOs) contribute to the development and implementation of Community environmental policy and legislation. It is therefore appropriate for part of the LIFE+ budget to support the operations of a number of appropriately qualified environmental NGOs through the competitive and transparent awarding of annual operating grants. Such NGOs would need to be independent and non-profit-making and to pursue activities in at least three European countries, either alone or in the form of an association.
(13)
The experience of current and past instruments has highlighted the need to plan and programme on a multi-annual basis and to concentrate efforts to promote environmental protection by prioritising and targeting the areas of activity able to benefit from Community co-financing.
(14)
Member States should be able to submit national annual priorities, different both from plans and programmes which are prepared for a number of sectors and which set a framework for future development consent and from plans and programmes which have been determined to require assessment pursuant to Directive 92/43/EEC, and those priorities should not be considered plans or programmes subject to Directive 2001/42/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 June 2001 on the assessment of the effects of certain plans and programmes on the environment (8).
(15)
Environmental protection requirements should be integrated into the definition and implementation of Community policies and activities, including financial instruments. LIFE+ should therefore be complementary to other Community financial instruments and the Commission and Member States should ensure such complementarity at Community, national, regional and local level.
(16)
In line with the conclusions of the Luxembourg European Council (December 1997) and of the Thessaloniki European Council (June 2003), candidate countries and the Western Balkan countries in the Stabilisation and Association Process should be eligible to participate in Community programmes, in accordance with the conditions established in the relevant bilateral agreements concluded with these countries.
(17)
It is necessary to consolidate a number of existing environmental instruments and to simplify programming and management by creating a single, streamlined financial instrument for the environment.
(18)
It is also necessary to ensure a smooth transition and to continue to monitor, audit and qualitatively assess the activities financed under current programmes following their expiry.
(19)
This Regulation lays down, for the entire duration of the programme, a financial envelope constituting the prime reference, within the meaning of point 37 of the Interinstitutional Agreement of 17 May 2006 between the European Parliament, the Council and the Commission on budgetary discipline and sound financial management (9), for the budgetary authority during the annual budgetary procedure.
(20)
The general objective of LIFE+ is to contribute to the implementation, updating and development of Community environmental policy and legislation and, in particular, to support the implementation of the 6th EAP. By working together through Community instruments to improve delivery at national or local levels, to achieve Community goals or to provide for Community-wide exchanges of information, Member States can achieve European added value. Since this objective of LIFE+ cannot be sufficiently achieved by the Member States and can therefore be better achieved at Community level, the Community may adopt measures, in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity as set out in Article 5 of the Treaty. In accordance with the principle of proportionality, as set out in that Article, this Regulation does not go beyond what is necessary in order to achieve its objective.
(21)
The measures necessary for the implementation of this Regulation should be adopted in accordance with Council Decision 1999/468/EC of 28 June 1999 laying down the procedures for the exercise of implementing powers conferred on the Commission (10).
(22)
In particular, the Commission should be empowered to add measures to Annex I and to amend Annex II to this Regulation. Since those measures are of general scope and are designed to amend non-essential elements of this Regulation, or to supplement it by the addition of new non-essential elements, they must be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny provided for in Article 5a of Decision 1999/468/EC,
HAVE ADOPTED THIS REGULATION:
