Article 161
Review and report
1.   The Commission shall conduct periodic reviews of the implementation of this Directive in order to ensure that its implementation does not result in manifest discrimination between institutions on the basis of their legal structure or ownership model.
2.   By 30 June 2016, the Commission shall, in close cooperation with EBA, submit a report to the European Parliament and to the Council, together with a legislative proposal if appropriate, on the provisions on remuneration in this Directive and in Regulation (EU) No 575/2013, following a review thereof, taking into account international developments and with particular regard to:
(a)
their efficiency, implementation and enforcement, including the identification of any lacunae arising from the application of the principle of proportionality to those provisions;
(b)
the impact of compliance with the principle in Article 94(1)(g) in respect of:
(i)
competitiveness and financial stability; and
(ii)
any staff working effectively and physically in subsidiaries established outside the EEA of parent institutions established within the EEA.
That review shall consider, in particular, whether the principle set out in Article 94(1)(g) should continue to apply to any staff covered by point (b)(ii) of the first subparagraph.
3.   From 2014, EBA shall, in cooperation with EIOPA and ESMA, publish a biannual report analysing the extent to which Member States' law refers to external credit ratings for regulatory purposes and the steps taken by Member States to reduce such references. Those reports shall outline how the competent authorities meet their obligations under Article 77(1) and (3) and Article 79(b). Those reports shall also outline the degree of supervisory convergence in that regard.
4.   By 31 December 2014, the Commission shall review and report on the application of Articles 108 and 109 and shall submit that report to the European Parliament and to the Council together with a legislative proposal if appropriate.
5.   By 31 December 2016, the Commission shall review and report on the results achieved under Article 91(11), including the appropriateness of benchmarking diversity practices, taking into account all relevant Union and international developments, and shall submit that report to the European Parliament and to the Council together with a legislative proposal if appropriate.
6.   By 31 December 2015, the Commission shall consult the ESRB, EBA, EIOPA, ESMA and other relevant parties on the effectiveness of information-sharing arrangements under this Directive, both in normal times and during times of stress.
7.   By 31 December 2015, EBA shall review and submit a report to the Commission on the application of this Directive and of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 on the cooperation of the Union and Member States with third countries. That report shall identify any areas which require further development as regards cooperation and information sharing. EBA shall publish the report on its website.
8.   Upon receiving a mandate from the Commission, EBA shall explore whether financial sector entities which declare that they carry out their activities in accordance with Islamic banking principles are adequately covered by this Directive and by Regulation (EU) No 575/2013. The Commission shall review the report prepared by EBA and shall submit a legislative proposal to the European Parliament and to the Council if appropriate.
9.   By 1 July 2014, EBA shall report to the Commission on credit institutions' use of and benefits from ESCB central banks longer-term refinancing operations and similar central bank funding support measures. Based on that report and after consulting the ECB, the Commission shall, by 31 December 2014, submit a report to the European Parliament and to the Council on the use of and benefits from those refinancing operations and funding support measures for credit institutions authorised in the Union, together with a legislative proposal on the use of such refinancing operations and funding support measures if appropriate.
