Article 158
Significant branches
1.   The competent authorities of a host Member State may make a request to the consolidating supervisor where Article 112(1) applies or to the competent authorities of the home Member State, for a branch of an institution other than an investment firm subject to Article 95 of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 to be considered as significant.
2.   That request shall provide reasons for considering the branch to be significant with particular regard to the following:
(a)
whether the market share of the branch in terms of deposits exceeds 2 % in the host Member State;
(b)
the likely impact of a suspension or closure of the operations of the institution on systemic liquidity and the payment, clearing and settlement systems in the host Member State;
(c)
the size and the importance of the branch in terms of number of clients within the context of the banking or financial system of the host Member State.
The competent authorities of the home and host Member States, and the consolidating supervisor where Article 112(1) applies, shall do everything within their power to reach a joint decision on the designation of a branch as being significant.
If no joint decision is reached within two months of receipt of a request under the first subparagraph, the competent authorities of the host Member State shall take their own decision within a further period of two months on whether the branch is significant. In taking their decision, the competent authorities of the host Member State shall take into account any views and reservations of the consolidating supervisor or the competent authorities of the home Member State.
The decisions referred to in the second and third subparagraphs shall be set out in a document containing full reasons, shall be transmitted to the competent authorities concerned, and shall be recognised as determinative and applied by the competent authorities of the Member States concerned.
The designation of a branch as being significant shall not affect the rights and responsibilities of the competent authorities under this Directive.
3.   The competent authorities of the home Member State shall communicate to the competent authorities of a host Member State where a significant branch is established the information referred to in Article 117(1)(c) and (d) and carry out the tasks referred to in Article 112(1)(c) in cooperation with the competent authorities of the host Member State.
4.   If a competent authority of a home Member State becomes aware of an emergency situation as referred to in Article 114(1), it shall alert as soon as practicable the authorities referred to in Article 58(4) and in Article 59(1).
5.   Where Article 116 does not apply, the competent authorities supervising a institution with significant branches in other Member States shall establish and chair a college of supervisors to facilitate the reaching of a joint decision on the designation of a branch as being significant under paragraph 2 of this Article and the exchange of information under Article 60. The establishment and functioning of the college shall be based on written arrangements determined, after consulting the competent authorities concerned, by the competent authority of the home Member State. The competent authority of the home Member State shall decide which competent authorities participate in a meeting or in an activity of the college.
6.   The decision of the competent authority of the home Member State shall take account of the relevance of the supervisory activity to be planned or coordinated for those authorities, in particular the potential impact on the stability of the financial system in the Member States concerned referred to in Article 155(3) and the obligations referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article.
7.   The competent authority of the home Member State shall keep all members of the college fully informed, in advance, of the organisation of such meetings, the main issues to be discussed and the activities to be considered. The competent authority of the home Member State shall also keep all the members of the college fully informed, in a timely manner, of the actions taken in those meetings or the measures carried out.
