Article 130
Withdrawal of sugar
1.   To avoid price collapses in the internal market and to remedy situations of overproduction based on the forecast supply balance, and taking into account the commitments of the Union resulting from international agreements concluded in accordance with the TFEU, the Commission may adopt implementing acts withdrawing from the market, for a given marketing year, those quantities of sugar or isoglucose produced under quotas which exceed the threshold calculated in accordance with paragraph 2.
2.   The withdrawal threshold referred to in paragraph 1 shall be calculated, for each undertaking holding a quota, by multiplying its quota by a coefficient. The Commission may adopt implementing acts fixing that coefficient for a marketing year no later than 28 February of the previous marketing year, on the basis of expected market trends.
On the basis of updated market trends, the Commission may, by 31 October of the marketing year concerned, adopt implementing acts either adjusting or, where no coefficient has been fixed pursuant to the first subparagraph, fixing a coefficient.
3.   Each undertaking holding a quota shall store, at its own expense, until the beginning of the following marketing year, the sugar produced under quota in excess of the threshold calculated in accordance with paragraph 2. The sugar, isoglucose or inulin syrup quantities withdrawn during a marketing year shall be treated as the first quantities produced under quota for the following marketing year.
By way of derogation from the first subparagraph, taking into account the expected sugar market trends, the Commission may adopt implementing acts providing that, for the current, the following or both marketing years, all or part of the withdrawn sugar, isoglucose or inulin syrup is to be considered to be:
(a)
surplus sugar, isoglucose or inulin syrup available to become industrial sugar, industrial isoglucose or industrial inulin syrup; or
(b)
temporary quota production of which a part may be reserved for export respecting the commitments of the Union resulting from international agreements concluded in accordance with the TFEU.
4.   If sugar supply in the Union is inadequate, the Commission may adopt implementing acts allowing a certain quantity of withdrawn sugar, isoglucose or inulin syrup to be sold on the Union market before the end of the period of withdrawal.
5.   Where withdrawn sugar is treated as the first sugar production of the following marketing year, the minimum price of that marketing year, as referred to in Article 135, shall be paid to beet growers.
Where withdrawn sugar becomes industrial sugar or is exported in accordance with points (a) or (b) of the second subparagraph of paragraph 3 of this Article, the requirements of Article 135 on the minimum price shall not apply.
Where withdrawn sugar is sold on the Union market before the end of the period of withdrawal in accordance with paragraph 4 of this Article, the minimum price of the ongoing marketing year shall be paid to beet growers.
6.   Implementing acts pursuant to this Article shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 229(2).
