Article 93
Definitions
1.   For the purposes of this Section, the following definitions shall apply:
(a)
"a designation of origin" means the name of a region, a specific place or, in exceptional and duly justifiable cases, a country used to describe a product referred to in Article 92(1) fulfilling the following requirements:
(i)
the quality and characteristics of the product are essentially or exclusively due to a particular geographical environment with its inherent natural and human factors;
(ii)
the grapes from which the product is produced come exclusively from that geographical area;
(iii)
the production takes place in that geographical area; and
(iv)
the product is obtained from vine varieties belonging to Vitis vinifera;
(b)
"a geographical indication" means an indication referring to a region, a specific place or, in exceptional and duly justifiable cases, a country, used to describe a product referred to in Article 92(1) fulfilling the following requirements:
(i)
it possesses a specific quality, reputation or other characteristics attributable to that geographical origin;
(ii)
at least 85 % of the grapes used for its production come exclusively from that geographical area;
(iii)
its production takes place in that geographical area; and
(iv)
it is obtained from vine varieties belonging to Vitis vinifera or a cross between the Vitis vinifera species and other species of the genus Vitis.
2.   Certain traditionally used names shall constitute a designation of origin where they:
(a)
designate a wine;
(b)
refer to a geographical name;
(c)
fulfil the requirements referred to in points (a)(i) to (iv) of paragraph 1; and
(d)
have undergone the procedure conferring protection on designations of origin and geographical indications laid down in this Subsection.
3.   Designations of origin and geographical indications, including those relating to geographical areas in third countries, shall be eligible for protection in the Union in accordance with the rules laid down in this Subsection.
4.   Production as referred to in point (a)(iii) of paragraph 1 shall cover all the operations involved, from the harvesting of the grapes to the completion of the wine-making processes, with the exception of any post-production processes.
5.   For the purpose of the application of point (b)(ii) of paragraph 1, the maximum 15 % share of grapes which may originate outside the demarcated area shall originate from the Member State or third country in which the demarcated area is situated.
