Article 46
Restructuring and conversion of vineyards
1.   The objective of measures relating to the restructuring and conversion of vineyards shall be to increase the competitiveness of wine producers.
2.   The restructuring and conversion of vineyards shall be supported if Member States submit the inventory of their production potential in accordance with Article 145(3).
3.   Support for the restructuring and conversion of vineyards, which could also contribute to improving sustainable production systems and the environmental footprint of the wine sector, may only cover one or more of the following activities:
(a)
varietal conversion, including by means of grafting-on;
(b)
relocation of vineyards;
(c)
replanting of vineyards where that is necessary following mandatory grubbing up for health or phytosanitary reasons on the instruction of the Member State competent authority;
(d)
improvements to vineyard management techniques, in particular the introduction of advanced systems of sustainable production.
The normal renewal of vineyards, which means the replanting of the same parcel of land with the same wine grape variety according to the same system of vine cultivation, when vines have come to the end of their natural life, shall not be supported.
Member States may lay down further specifications, especially as regards the age of the vineyards replaced.
4.   Support for the restructuring and conversion of vineyards, including improving vineyard management techniques, may only take the following forms:
(a)
compensation to producers for the loss of revenue due to the implementation of the measure;
(b)
contribution to the costs of restructuring and conversion.
5.   Compensation to producers for the loss of revenue referred to in point (a) of paragraph 4 may cover up to 100 % of the relevant loss and take one of the following forms:
(a)
notwithstanding Subsection II of Section IVa of Chapter III of Title I of Part II of Regulation (EC) No 1234/2007 setting out the transitional planting right regime, the permission for old and new vines to coexist until the end of the transitional regime for a maximum period which shall not exceed three years;
(b)
financial compensation.
6.   The Union contribution to the actual costs of the restructuring and conversion of vineyards shall not exceed 50 %. In less developed regions, the Union contribution to the costs of restructuring and conversion shall not exceed 75 %.
