Article 81
Wine grape varieties
1.   Products listed in Part II of Annex VII and produced in the Union shall be made from wine grape varieties classifiable in accordance with paragraph 2 of this Article.
2.   Subject to paragraph 3, Member States shall classify which wine grape varieties may be planted, replanted or grafted on their territories for the purpose of wine production.
Only wine grape varieties meeting the following conditions may be classified by Member States:
(a)
the variety concerned belongs to the species Vitis vinifera or comes from a cross between the species Vitis vinifera and other species of the genus Vitis;
(b)
the variety is not one of the following: Noah, Othello, Isabelle, Jacquez, Clinton and Herbemont.
Where a wine grape variety is deleted from the classification referred to in the first subparagraph, grubbing up of this variety shall take place within 15 years of its deletion.
3.   Member States whose wine production does not exceed 50 000 hectolitres per wine year, calculated on the basis of the average production during the last five wine years, shall be exempt from the classification obligation provided for in the first subparagraph of paragraph 2.
However, also in those Member States, only wine grape varieties complying with the second subparagraph of paragraph 2 may be planted, replanted or grafted for the purpose of wine production.
4.   By way of derogation from the first and third subparagraphs of paragraph 2 and the second subparagraph of paragraph 3, the planting, replanting or grafting of the following wine grape varieties shall be allowed by the Member States for scientific research and experimental purposes:
(a)
wine grape varieties which are not classified, in the case of the Member States other than those referred to in paragraph 3;
(b)
wine grape varieties which do not comply with the second subparagraph of paragraph 2, in the case of the Member States referred to in paragraph 3.
5.   Areas planted with wine grape varieties for the purpose of wine production planted in breach of paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 shall be grubbed up.
However, there shall be no obligation to grub up such areas where the relevant production is intended exclusively for consumption by the wine-producer's household.
