Article 220
Measures concerning animal diseases and loss of consumer confidence due to public, animal or plant health risks
1.   The Commission may adopt implementing acts taking exceptional support measures for the affected market in order to take account of:
(a)
restrictions on intra-Union and third-country trade which may result from the application of measures for combating the spread of diseases in animals; and
(b)
serious market disturbances directly attributed to a loss in consumer confidence due to public, animal or plant health and disease risks.
Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 229(2).
2.   The measures provided for in paragraph 1 shall apply to any of the following sectors:
(a)
beef and veal;
(b)
milk and milk products;
(c)
pigmeat;
(d)
sheepmeat and goatmeat;
(e)
eggs;
(f)
poultrymeat.
The measures provided for in point (b) of the first subparagraph of paragraph 1 related to a loss in consumer confidence due to public or plant health risks shall also apply to all other agricultural products except those listed in Section 2 of Part XXIV of Annex I.
The Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with the urgency procedure referred to in Article 228, extending the list of products in the first two subparagraphs of this paragraph.
3.   The measures provided for in paragraph 1 shall be taken at the request of the Member State concerned.
4.   The measures provided for in point (a) of the first subparagraph of paragraph 1 may be taken only if the Member State concerned has taken health and veterinary measures quickly to stamp out the disease, and only to the extent and for the duration strictly necessary to support the market concerned.
5.   The Union shall provide part-financing equivalent to 50 % of the expenditure borne by Member States for the measures provided for in paragraph 1.
However, with regard to the beef and veal, milk and milk products, pigmeat and sheepmeat and goatmeat sectors, the Union shall provide part-financing equivalent to 60 % of such expenditure when combating foot-and-mouth disease.
6.   Member States shall ensure that, where producers contribute to the expenditure borne by Member States, this does not result in a distortion of competition between producers in different Member States.
