Article 26
Aid for the supply of milk and milk products to children
1.   Union aid shall be granted for supplying to children in educational establishments referred to in Article 22 certain milk and processed milk products falling within CN codes 0401, 0403, 0404 90 and 0406 or CN code 2202 90.
2.   From 1 August 2015, Member States, at national or regional level, wishing to participate in the scheme shall have a prior strategy for its implementation. They may also provide for the accompanying measures, which may include information on measures for education about healthy eating habits, about local food chains and about combating food wastage, that are necessary to make the programme effective.
3.   When drawing up their strategies, Member States shall draw up a list of milk and milk products that will be eligible under their respective schemes, in accordance with the rules adopted by the Commission pursuant to Article 27.
4.   Except for free distribution of meals to children in educational establishments, Union aid referred to in paragraph 1 shall not be used to replace funding for any existing national milk and milk products schemes or other school distribution schemes that include milk or milk products. However, if a Member State already has a scheme in place that would be eligible for Union aid under this Article and intends to extend it or make it more effective, including as regards the target group of the scheme, its duration or eligible products, Union aid may be granted. In such a case, the Member State shall indicate in its implementation strategy how it intends to extend its scheme or make it more effective.
5.   Member States may, in addition to Union aid, grant national aid in accordance with Article 217.
6.   The Union school milk and milk products scheme shall be without prejudice to any separate national school schemes to encourage the consumption of milk and milk products that are compatible with Union law.
7.   Measures on fixing the Union aid for all milk and milk products and the maximum quantity eligible for Union aid provided for in paragraph 1 shall be taken by the Council in accordance with Article 43(3) TFEU.
8.   Member States participating in the scheme shall publicise, at the places where the food is distributed, their involvement in the aid scheme and the fact that it is subsidised by the Union.
