Article 168
Contractual relations
1.   Without prejudice to Article 148 concerning the milk and milk products sector and Article 125 concerning the sugar sector, if a Member State decides, in respect of agricultural products from a sector listed in Article 1(2), other than milk and milk products and sugar:
(a)
that every delivery in its territory of those products by a producer to a processor or distributor must be covered by a written contract between the parties; and/or
(b)
that the first purchasers must make a written offer for a contract for the delivery in its territory of those agricultural products by the producer,
such a contract or such an offer for a contract shall fulfil the conditions laid down in paragraphs 4 and 6 of this Article.
2.   Where the Member State decides that deliveries of the products covered by this Article by a producer to a processor must be covered by a written contract between the parties, it shall also decide which stage or stages of the delivery shall be covered by such a contract if delivery of the products concerned is made through one or more intermediaries.
Member States shall ensure that the provisions that they adopt under this Article do not impair the proper functioning of the internal market.
3.   In the case described in paragraph 2, the Member State may establish a mediation mechanism to cover cases in which there is no mutual agreement to conclude such a contract, thereby ensuring fair contractual relations.
4.   Any contract or offer for a contract referred to in paragraph 1 shall:
(a)
be made in advance of the delivery;
(b)
be made in writing; and
(c)
include, in particular, the following elements:
(i)
the price payable for the delivery, which shall:
—
be static and be set out in the contract, and/or
—
be calculated by combining various factors set out in the contract, which may include market indicators reflecting changes in market conditions, the quantities delivered and the quality or composition of the agricultural products delivered,
(ii)
the quantity and quality of the products concerned which may or must be delivered and the timing of such deliveries,
(iii)
the duration of the contract, which may include either a definite duration or an indefinite duration with termination clauses,
(iv)
details regarding payment periods and procedures,
(v)
arrangements for collecting or delivering the agricultural products, and
(vi)
rules applicable in the event of force majeure.
5.   By way of derogation from paragraph 1, a contract or an offer for a contract shall not be required where the products concerned are delivered by a producer to a purchaser which is a cooperative of which the producer is a member if the statutes of that cooperative or the rules and decisions provided for in, or derived from, these statutes contain provisions having similar effects to the provisions set out in points (a), (b) and (c) of paragraph 4.
6.   All elements of contracts for the delivery of agricultural products concluded by producers, collectors, processors or distributors, including those elements referred to in point (c) of paragraph 4, shall be freely negotiated between the parties.
Notwithstanding the first subparagraph, one or both of the following shall apply:
(a)
where a Member State decides to make written contracts for the delivery of agricultural products compulsory in accordance with paragraph 1, it may establish a minimum duration, applicable only to written contracts between a producer and the first purchaser of the agricultural products. Such a minimum duration shall be at least six months and shall not impair the proper functioning of the internal market;
(b)
where a Member State decides that the first purchaser of agricultural products must make the producer a written offer for a contract in accordance with paragraph 1, it may provide that the offer must include a minimum duration for the contract, set by national law for this purpose. Such a minimum duration shall be at least six months and shall not impair the proper functioning of the internal market.
The second subparagraph shall be without prejudice to the producer's right to refuse such a minimum duration provided that he does so in writing. In this case, the parties shall be free to negotiate all elements of the contract, including those elements referred to in point (c) of paragraph 4.
7.   Member States which make use of the options referred to in this Article shall ensure that the provisions set in place do not impair the proper functioning of the internal market.
Member States shall notify the Commission of how they apply any measures introduced under this Article.
8.   The Commission may adopt implementing acts laying down the measures necessary for the uniform application of points (a) and (b) of paragraph 4 and paragraph 5 of this Article and measures relating to notifications to be made by the Member States in accordance with this Article.
Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 229(2).
