Article 202
Delegated powers
1.   In order to ensure the proper functioning of the export refund system, the Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 227 laying down the requirement to lodge a security guaranteeing the fulfilment of the operators' obligations.
2.   In order to minimise the administrative burden for operators and authorities, the Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 227 setting thresholds below which the obligation to issue or present an export licence may not be required, designating destinations or operations where an exemption for the obligation to present an export licence may be justified and permitting export licences to be granted ex-post in justified situations.
3.   In order to address practical situations justifying the full or partial eligibility for export refunds and to help operators bridge the period between the application and the final payment of the export refund, the Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 227 concerning rules on:
(a)
another date for the refund;
(b)
advance payment of export refunds, including the conditions for the lodging and release of a security;
(c)
additional proof where doubts exist as to the real destination of products, and the opportunity for re-importation into the customs territory of the Union;
(d)
destinations treated as exports from the Union, and the inclusion of destinations within the customs territory of the Union eligible for export refunds.
4.   In order to ensure the equal access of exporters of products listed in Annex I to the Treaties and of products processed therefrom to export refunds, the Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 227 on the application of Article 199(1) and (2) to products referred to in point (b) of Article 196(1).
5.   In order to ensure that products benefiting from export refunds are exported from the customs territory of the Union, and to avoid their return to that territory and to minimise the administrative burden for operators in generating and submitting proof that refund products reached a country of destination for differentiated refunds, the Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 227 concerning rules on:
(a)
the time limit by which the exit from the customs territory of the Union must be finalised, including the time for temporary re-entry;
(b)
the processing that products benefiting from export refunds may undergo during that period;
(c)
the proof of having reached a destination in order to be eligible for differentiated refunds;
(d)
the refund thresholds and conditions under which exporters may be exempted from such proof;
(e)
conditions for approval of proof, provided by independent third parties, of reaching a destination where differentiated refunds apply.
6.   In order to encourage exporters to respect animal welfare conditions, and in order to enable the competent authorities to verify correct expenditure of export refunds where that is conditional on respect for animal welfare requirements, the Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 227 on the respect of animal welfare requirements outside the customs territory of the Union, including the use of independent third parties.
7.   In order to take into account the specific characteristics of the different sectors, the Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 227 establishing specific requirements and conditions for operators and for the products eligible for an export refund, and coefficients for the purposes of calculating export refunds taking into account the ageing process of certain spirit drinks obtained from cereals.
