Article 172
Regulation of supply for ham with a protected designation of origin or protected geographical indication
1.   Upon the request of a producer organisation recognised under Article 152(1) of this Regulation, an interbranch organisation recognised under Article 157(1) of this Regulation or a group of operators referred to in Article 3(2) of Regulation (EU) No 1151/2012, Member States may lay down, for a limited period of time, binding rules for the regulation of the supply of ham benefiting from a protected designation of origin or from a protected geographical indication under Article 5(1) and (2) of Regulation (EU) No 1151/2012.
2.   The rules referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article shall be subject to the existence of a prior agreement between the parties in the geographical area referred to in point (c) of Article 7(1) of Regulation (EU) No 1151/2012. Such an agreement shall be concluded, after consultation with pig producers in the geographical area, between at least two thirds of the processors of that ham representing at least two thirds of the production of that ham in the geographical area referred to in point (c) of Article 7(1) of Regulation (EU) No 1151/2012 and, if considered to be appropriate by the Member State, at least two thirds of the pig producers in the geographical area referred to in point (c) of Article 7(1) of Regulation (EU) No 1151/2012.
3.   The rules referred to in paragraph 1:
(a)
shall only cover the regulation of supply of the product concerned and/or its raw material and shall have the aim of adapting the supply of that ham to demand;
(b)
shall have effect only on the product concerned;
(c)
may be made binding for no more than three years and may be renewed after this period, following a new request, as referred to in paragraph 1;
(d)
shall not damage the trade in products other than those concerned by those rules;
(e)
shall not relate to any transaction after the first marketing of the ham concerned;
(f)
shall not allow for price fixing, including where prices are set for guidance or recommendation;
(g)
shall not render unavailable an excessive proportion of the product concerned that would otherwise be available;
(h)
shall not create discrimination, constitute a barrier for new entrants in the market, or lead to small producers being adversely affected;
(i)
shall contribute to maintaining the quality and/or the development of the product concerned.
4.   The rules referred to in paragraph 1 shall be published in an official publication of the Member State concerned.
5.   Member States shall carry out checks in order to ensure that the conditions laid down in paragraph 3 are complied with, and, where it has been found by the competent national authorities that such conditions have not been complied with, shall repeal the rules referred to in paragraph 1.
6.   Member States shall notify the Commission forthwith of the rules referred to in paragraph 1 which they have adopted. The Commission shall inform other Member States of any notification of such rules.
7.   The Commission may at any time adopt implementing acts requiring that a Member State repeal the rules laid down by that Member State pursuant to paragraph 1 if the Commission finds that those rules do not comply with the conditions laid down in paragraph 4, prevent or distort competition in a substantial part of the internal market or jeopardise free trade or the attainment of the objectives of Article 39 TFEU. Those implementing acts shall be adopted without applying the procedure referred to in Article 229(2) or (3) of this Regulation.
