Article 219
Measures against market disturbance
1.   In order to react efficiently and effectively against threats of market disturbance caused by significant price rises or falls on internal or external markets or other events and circumstances significantly disturbing or threatening to disturb the market, where that situation, or its effects on the market, is likely to continue or deteriorate, the Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 227 to take the measures necessary to address that market situation, while respecting any obligations resulting from international agreements concluded in accordance with the TFEU and provided that any other measures available under this Regulation appear to be insufficient.
Where, in the cases of threats of market disturbances referred to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph, imperative grounds of urgency so require, the procedure provided for in Article 228 shall apply to delegated acts adopted pursuant to the first subparagraph of this paragraph.
Those imperative grounds of urgency may include the need to take immediate action to address or prevent market disturbance, where threats of market disturbance occur so swiftly or unexpectedly that immediate action is necessary to efficiently and effectively address the situation, or where action would prevent such threats of market disturbance from materialising, continuing or turning into a more severe or prolonged disturbance, or where delaying immediate action would threaten to cause or aggravate the disturbance or would increase the extent of the measures which would later be necessary to address the threat or disturbance or would be detrimental to production or market conditions.
Such measures may to the extent and for the time necessary to address the market disturbance or threat thereof extend or modify the scope, duration or other aspects of other measures provided for under this Regulation, or provide for export refunds, or suspend import duties in whole or in part including for certain quantities or periods as necessary.
2.   The measures referred to in paragraph 1 shall not apply to products listed in Section 2 of Part XXIV of Annex I.
However, the Commission may, by means of delegated acts adopted in accordance with the urgency procedure referred to in Article 228, decide that the measures referred to in paragraph 1 shall apply to one or more of the products listed in Section 2 of Part XXIV of Annex I.
3.   The Commission may adopt implementing acts laying down necessary procedural rules and technical criteria for the application of measures referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 229(2).
