Article 80
Oenological practices and methods of analyses
1.   Only oenological practices authorised in accordance with Annex VIII and provided for in point (g) of Article 75(3) and in Article 83(2) and (3) shall be used in the production and conservation of the products listed in Part II of Annex VII in the Union.
The first subparagraph shall not apply to:
(a)
grape juice and concentrated grape juice; and
(b)
grape must and concentrated grape must intended for the preparation of grape juice.
Authorised oenological practices shall only be used for the purposes of ensuring proper vinification, proper preservation or proper refinement of the product.
Products listed in Part II of Annex VII shall be produced in the Union in accordance with the rules laid down in Annex VIII.
2.   Products listed in Part II of Annex VII shall not be marketed in the Union if:
(a)
they have undergone unauthorised Union oenological practices;
(b)
they have undergone unauthorised national oenological practices; or
(c)
they do not comply with the rules laid down in Annex VIII.
The grapevine products which are unmarketable in accordance with the first subparagraph shall be destroyed. By way of derogation from this rule, Member States may authorise the use of certain of such products, the characteristics of which they shall determine, by distilleries or vinegar factories or for industrial purposes, provided that this authorisation does not become an incentive to produce grapevine products by means of unauthorised oenological practices.
3.   When authorising oenological practices for wine as referred to in point (g) of Article 75(3), the Commission shall:
(a)
take into account the oenological practices and methods of analyses recommended and published by the OIV, as well as the results of experimental use of as-yet unauthorised oenological practices;
(b)
take into account the protection of human health;
(c)
take into account the possible risk of consumers being misled due to their well established perception of the product and their corresponding expectations, having regard to the availability and feasibility of informational means to exclude such risks;
(d)
allow the preservation of the natural and essential characteristics of the wine and not cause a substantial change in the composition of the product concerned;
(e)
ensure an acceptable minimum level of environmental care;
(f)
respect the general rules concerning oenological practices and the rules laid down in Annex VIII.
4.   In order to ensure the correct treatment of unmarketable wine products, the Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 227 concerning rules on the national procedures referred to in the second subparagraph of paragraph 2 of this Article, and derogations therefrom concerning the withdrawal or destruction of wine products that do not comply with the requirements.
5.   The Commission shall, where necessary, adopt implementing acts laying down the methods referred to in point (d) of Article 75(5) for products listed in Part II of Annex VII. Those methods shall be based on any relevant methods recommended and published by the OIV, unless they would be ineffective or inappropriate in view of the objective pursued by the Union. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 229(2).
Pending the adoption of such implementing acts, the methods and rules to be used shall be those allowed by the Member State concerned.
