Article 39
Structure and functioning of the Platform
1.   The Platform shall be composed of representatives of Member States and of the Commission. It shall be chaired by a representative of the Commission.
2.   Each Member State shall appoint a high-level representative to the Platform. Where relevant as regards the function and expertise, a Member State may appoint more than one representative in relation to different tasks of the Platform. Each representative appointed to the Platform shall have an alternate. Only Member States shall have voting rights. Each Member State shall have only one vote regardless of the number of representatives.
3.   On a proposal by the Commission, the Platform shall adopt its rules of procedure by a simple majority of its members.
4.   The Platform shall meet at regular intervals in order to ensure the effective performance of its tasks provided for in this Regulation. Where necessary, the Platform shall hold extraordinary meetings on the basis of a reasoned request by the Commission or by a Member State.
5.   The Commission shall assist the Platform by means of an executive secretariat that provides technical and logistic support.
6.   The Platform may establish standing or temporary sub-groups dealing with specific questions and tasks relating to this Regulation.
The Platform shall establish at least a sub-group to ensure the appropriate implementation of the Academies pursuant to Chapter V.
7.   The Platform shall invite representatives of the European Parliament to attend, as observers, its meetings, including the meetings of the standing or temporary sub-groups referred to in paragraph 6. The European Parliament shall receive all documentation and information related to the work of the Platform at the same time as the members of the Platform.
8.   The Platform shall establish a net-zero Industry Group. That group shall, on its own initiative or upon a request of the Platform, provide recommendations to the Platform with a view to contributing to achieving the objectives of this Regulation.
9.   Where appropriate, the Platform or the Commission may invite experts representing industry, civil society, academia, trade unions and other third parties to participate in the meetings of the Platform and in sub-group meetings or to provide written contributions. Those experts shall not participate in decision making.
10.   The Platform shall take the necessary measures to ensure the safe handling and processing of confidential and commercially sensitive information.
11.   The Platform shall use its best endeavours to take decisions by means of consensus.
12.   The Platform shall coordinate and cooperate with existing and relevant industrial alliances and, where appropriate, invite them to attend its meetings, including the meetings of the standing or temporary sub-groups referred to in paragraph 6.
13.   The Platform shall meet at least once every year with representatives from the SET Plan Steering Group referred to in Article 35 in order to discuss the most recent developments, synergies between the implementation of this Regulation and the Strategic Energy Technology Plan and to issue recommendations thereon.
