Article 9
Duration of the permit-granting process
1.   The permit-granting process for net-zero technology manufacturing projects shall not exceed any of the following time limits:
(a)
12 months for the construction or expansion of net-zero technology manufacturing projects with a yearly manufacturing capacity of less than 1 GW;
(b)
18 months for the construction or expansion of net-zero technology manufacturing projects with a yearly manufacturing capacity of 1 GW or more.
2.   The permit-granting process for net-zero technology manufacturing projects for which a yearly manufacturing capacity is not measured in GW, shall not exceed a time limit of 18 months.
3.   Where energy-intensive industry decarbonisation projects, including when recognised as strategic projects, require the construction of several facilities or units in one site, the project promoter and the single point of contact may agree on splitting the project into several smaller projects for the purposes of complying with the applicable time limits.
4.   Where an environmental impact assessment is required pursuant to Directive 2011/92/EU, the steps of the assessment referred to in Article 1(2), point (g)(i), of that Directive shall not be included in the duration of permit-granting process referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article.
5.   Where the consultation pursuant to Article 1(2), point (g)(ii), of Directive 2011/92/EU results in the need to supplement the environmental impact assessment report with additional information, the single point of contact may give the project promoter the opportunity to submit additional information. In that case, the single point of contact shall notify the project promoter of the date when the additional information is due, which shall be no less than 30 days from the date of the notification. The period between the deadline for providing additional information and the submission of that information shall not be counted towards the duration of the permit-granting process referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article.
6.   In exceptional cases, where the nature, complexity, location or size of the proposed net-zero technology manufacturing project or net-zero strategic project so requires, a Member State may once extend the time limits referred to in paragraphs 1, 2 and 7 of this Article and in Article 16(1) and (2) by a maximum of 3 months before their expiry and on a case-by-case basis.
7.   Where a Member State considers that the proposed net-zero technology manufacturing project or net-zero strategic project raises exceptional risks for the health and safety of workers or of the general population, and where additional time is necessary to establish that measures to address identifiable risks have been put in place, it may extend the time limits referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article and in Article 16 (1) and (2) by 6 months, within 6 months of the start of the permit-granting process.
8.   In the application of paragraph 6 or 7, the single point of contact shall inform the project promoter in writing of the reasons for the extension and of the date when the comprehensive decision is expected.
9.   The single point of contact referred to in Article 6(1) of this Regulation shall notify the project promoter of the date when the environmental impact assessment report referred in Article 5(1) of Directive 2011/92/EU is due, taking into account the organisation of the permit-granting process in the relevant Member State and the need to allow sufficient time to assess the report. The period between the deadline for providing the environmental impact report and the submission of that report shall not be counted towards the duration of the permit-granting process referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article.
10.   No later than 45 days from the receipt of the permit-granting application, the single point of contact concerned shall acknowledge that the application is complete or, if the project promoter has not sent all the information required to process the application, request the project promoter to submit a complete application without undue delay, specifying which information is missing. In the event that the submitted application is deemed to be incomplete for a second time, the single point of contact may, within 30 days of the second submission, make a second request for information. The single point of contact shall not request information in areas not covered in the first request for additional information and shall be entitled only to request further evidence to complete the identified missing information. The date of the acknowledgement of the completeness of the application from the single point of contact referred to in Article 6(1) shall serve as the start of the permit-granting process for that particular application.
11.   No later than two months from the date of the receipt of the application, the single point of contact shall draw up, in close cooperation with other authorities concerned, a detailed schedule for the permit-granting process. That schedule shall start from the moment when the single point of contact acknowledges the completeness of the application. The schedule shall be published by the single point of contact on a free access website.
12.   The time limits set in this Article and in Article 16 shall be without prejudice to obligations arising from Union and international law, and without prejudice to administrative appeal procedures and judicial remedies before a court or tribunal.
13.   The time limits set in this Article and in Article 16 for any of the permit-granting processes shall be without prejudice to any shorter time limits set by Member States.
