Article 6
Single points of contact
1.   By 30 December 2024 Member States shall establish or designate one or more authorities as single points of contact at the relevant administrative level. Each single point of contact shall be responsible for facilitating and coordinating the permit-granting process for net-zero technology manufacturing projects, including for net-zero strategic projects, and for providing information on streamlining the administrative processes in accordance with Article 7, including information on when an application is considered to be completed in accordance with Article 9(10).
2.   Where a Member State establishes or designates more than one single point of contact pursuant to paragraph 1 of this Article the Member State shall provide tools to help project promoters identify the appropriate established or designated contact point on the online web page set up in accordance with Article 7.
3.   A single point of contact established or designated pursuant to paragraph 1shall be the sole point of contact for the project promoter in the permit-granting process for a net-zero technology manufacturing project, including a net-zero strategic project. It shall coordinate and facilitate the submission of all relevant documents and information and shall notify the project promoter of the outcome of the comprehensive decision.
4.   Project promoters shall be allowed to submit any documents relevant to the permit-granting process in electronic form.
5.   The competent authorities shall ensure that any relevant studies carried out, or permits or authorisations issued, for a given project are taken into account and that no duplicate studies, permits or authorisations are required, unless otherwise required under Union or national law.
6.   Member States shall ensure that applicants have easy access to information on and procedures for the settlement of disputes concerning the permit-granting process including, where applicable, alternative dispute resolution mechanisms, if such procedures are provided for by national law.
7.   Member States shall ensure that the single point of contact and all competent authorities responsible for any step along the permit-granting processes, including all procedural steps, have a sufficient number of qualified staff and sufficient financial, technical and technological resources necessary, including, where appropriate, for up- skilling and re-skilling, for the effective performance of their tasks under this Regulation.
8.   The Platform referred to in Articles 38 and 39 shall periodically discuss the implementation of this Section and Articles 15 and 16 and share best-practices for organising single points of contact.
9.   The authorities involved in the permit-granting process and other authorities concerned shall specify and make available to the single point of contact concerned, the requirements and extent of information requested of a project promoter before the permit-granting process commences.
