Article 40
Net-zero Regulatory Burden Scientific Advisory Group
1.   A Net-zero Regulatory Burden Scientific Advisory Group (the ‘Scientific Advisory Group’) is hereby established.
2.   The Scientific Advisory Group shall be composed of at least 7 senior scientific experts covering a broad range of relevant disciplines. Members of the Scientific Advisory Group shall fulfil the criteria laid down in paragraph 4.
3.   No more than two members of the Scientific Advisory Group shall hold the nationality of the same Member State. The independence of the members of the Scientific Advisory Group shall be beyond doubt.
4.   The members of the Scientific Advisory Group shall be appointed for a term of four years, which shall be renewable once, following an open, fair and transparent selection procedure. The selection of members shall be based on the following criteria:
(a)
scientific excellence;
(b)
experience in carrying out scientific assessments and providing scientific advice in their fields of expertise;
(c)
expertise in the field of public administration or other fields relevant for the tasks of the Scientific Advisory Group;
(d)
professional experience in an inter-disciplinary environment in an international context.
5.   The members of the Scientific Advisory Group shall be appointed in a personal capacity and shall provide their opinions independently of the Member States and of the Union institutions. The Scientific Advisory Group shall elect a chairperson from among its members for a period of four years. It shall adopt its rules of procedure.
6.   The Scientific Advisory Group shall in the exercise of its activities function exclusively in an advisory capacity and act without prejudice to the Commission’s right of initiative, the Interinstitutional Agreement on Better Law-Making and the Commission’s scrutiny and quality-control functions in the Regulatory Scrutiny Board.
7.   The Scientific Advisory Group shall support, in accordance with paragraph 6, the work of the Commission, of the European Parliament and of the Member States, while acting independently in discharging its tasks by providing advisory reports on the regulatory impact and burden of Union law on industrial activities within the scope of this Regulation. In order to provide consistent advice, the Scientific Advisory Group shall assess regulatory impacts and burdens on industrial activities within the scope of this Regulation, utilising a science informed methodology and, where appropriate, taking into account the Better Regulation Toolbox.
8.   The Commission shall provide the secretariat of the Scientific Advisory Group.
9.   The Scientific Advisory Group shall regularly exchange views on its work with the Platform.
