Article 28
Other forms of public intervention
1.   Without prejudice to Articles 107 and 108 TFEU and Article 4 of Directive (EU) 2018/2001 and in line with the Union’s international commitments, when deciding to set up new schemes or to update existing schemes benefitting households, companies or consumers which incentivise the purchase of net-zero technology final products, Member States, regional or local authorities, bodies governed by public law or associations formed by one or more such authorities or one or more such bodies governed by public law shall design those schemes in such a way as to promote the purchase by beneficiaries of net-zero technology final products with a high sustainability and resilience contribution as referred in paragraph 4 of this Article, by providing additional proportionate financial compensation or by conditioning the eligibility of the scheme on the basis of the criteria laid down in paragraph 4 of this Article, while considering the accessibility of the schemes for citizens living in energy poverty.
2.   The additional financial compensation granted by authorities in accordance with paragraph 1 of this Article, due to the application of the criteria laid down in paragraph 4, first subparagraph, introductory part and points (b) and (c), of this Article, shall not exceed 5 % of the cost of the net-zero technology final product for the consumer, with the exception of schemes targeting citizens living in energy poverty, as defined in Article 2, point (1), of Regulation (EU) 2023/955 of the European Parliament and of the Council (57), for which the limit shall be 15 %.
3.   When designing and implementing a scheme pursuant to paragraph 1, the authority shall assess the resilience and sustainability contribution of available net-zero technology final products on the market on the basis of on an open, non-discriminatory and transparent process. Any net-zero technology final product shall be entitled to apply to join the scheme at any time. The authority shall specify a pass mark for net-zero technology final products to be eligible to the additional financial compensation under the support scheme.
4.   The sustainability and resilience contribution of other forms of public intervention shall be based on their contribution to resilience, taking into account the proportion of the net-zero technology or its main specific components originating from a third country that accounts for more than 50 % of the supply of that specific net-zero technology within the Union, and at least one of the following:
(a)
environmental sustainability going beyond the minimum requirements in applicable law;
(b)
contribution to innovation by providing entirely new solutions or improving comparable state-of-the-art solutions;
(c)
contribution to the energy system integration.
The criteria referred to in the first subparagraph shall be objective, transparent and non-discriminatory.
This shall not preclude Member States from using additional non-price criteria beyond those laid down in the first subparagraph.
For the purposes of the contribution to resilience referred to in the first subparagraph, introductory part, of this paragraph, the country of origin shall be determined in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 952/2013.
5.   Member States shall publish on a single free access website all information relating to schemes pursuant to paragraph 1 for each relevant net-zero technology final product.
