Article 14
Application and recognition
1.   Applications for recognition of net-zero technology manufacturing projects as net-zero strategic projects shall be submitted by the project promoter to the relevant Member State.
2.   The application referred to in paragraph 1 shall contain the following:
(a)
relevant evidence related to the fulfilment of the criteria laid down in Article 13(1) or (3);
(b)
a business plan evaluating the financial viability of the project consistent with the objective of creating quality jobs; and
(c)
a first draft timetable for the project estimating when the project would be able to contribute to the Union’s manufacturing capacity benchmark referred to in Article 5 or the Union level objective of CO2 injection capacity referred to in Article 20.
The Commission shall provide a pre-set form to submit the applications referred to in paragraph 1.
3.   Member States shall assess the application referred to in paragraph 1 through a fair and transparent process within one month of the receipt of the complete application. If the project promoter has not sent all the relevant and complete information required to process an application, the Member State shall request, once only, that the project promoter submit complementary information without undue delay, in order to obtain a complete application. The date of the acknowledgement of the completeness of the submission shall serve as the start of the assessment process. The decision resulting from this process shall be reasoned and shall be communicated to the project promoter and to the Platform referred to in Articles 38 and 39.
4.   If there is no decision within the timeframe referred to in paragraph 3, the project promoter may notify the Member State and request without undue delay that the Member State provide the project promoter with an updated deadline, which shall not be later than 30 days from the original deadline.
5.   The Commission may provide its opinion on the approved net-zero strategic projects. Where a Member State rejects the application, the applicant shall have the right to submit the application to the Commission, which shall assess the application within 20 working days. The Commission’s assessment is without prejudice to the Member State’s decision.
6.   Where the Commission, following its assessment in accordance with paragraph 5 of this Article, confirms the rejection of the application by the Member State, it shall notify the applicant of its conclusion in the form of a letter. Where the Commission differs in its assessment from the Member State, the Platform referred to in Articles 38 and 39 shall discuss the project in question.
7.   Where the Commission or a Member State finds that a net-zero strategic project has undergone substantial changes or that it no longer fulfils the criteria laid down in Article 13, or where its recognition as a net-zero strategic project was based on an application containing incorrect information, it shall inform the project promoter concerned. After hearing the project promoter, the Member State may repeal the decision recognising a project as a net-zero strategic project.
8.   A project which is no longer recognised as a net-zero strategic project shall lose all rights connected to that status under this Regulation.
9.   The Commission shall set up and maintain an openly available registry of net-zero strategic projects.
