Article 15
Priority status of net-zero strategic projects
1.   Project promoters and all authorities concerned shall ensure that for net-zero strategic projects the relevant processes are treated in the most rapid way possible in accordance with Union and national law.
2.   Without prejudice to obligations provided for in Union law, where a project is recognised as a net-zero strategic project, Member States shall grant that net-zero strategic project the status of the highest national significance possible, where such a status exists in national law, and that net-zero strategic project shall be treated accordingly in the permit-granting processes, including those relating to environmental assessments and, where data is available, to spatial planning.
3.   Net-zero strategic projects shall be considered to contribute to the security of supply of net-zero technologies in the Union and, therefore, to be in the public interest. With regard to the environmental impacts or obligations referred to in Article 4(7) of Directive 2000/60/EC, Article 9(1), point (a), of Directive 2009/147/EC, Articles 6(4) and 16(1) of Directive 92/43/EEC and in Union legislative acts on nature restoration, net-zero strategic projects in the Union shall be considered to be of public interest and may be considered to have an overriding public interest and to serve the interests of public health and safety provided that all the conditions set out in those acts are fulfilled.
4.   All dispute resolution procedures, litigation, appeals and judicial remedies related to net-zero strategic projects before any national courts, tribunals or panels, including with regard to mediation or arbitration, where they exist in national law, shall be treated as urgent if and to the extent to which national law concerning permit-granting processes provides for such urgency procedures and provided that the usually applicable rights of defence of individuals or of local communities are respected. Project promoters of net-zero strategic projects shall participate in such urgency procedures, where applicable.
