Article 42
Monitoring
1.   The Commission shall monitor on an ongoing basis:
(a)
the Union’s progress with respect to the Union’s objectives referred to in Article 1, in particular the supply risks of net-zero technologies that would distort competition or fragment the internal market, and the related impact of this Regulation;
(b)
the Union’s progress in meeting the benchmarks referred to in Article 5, taking into account constraints and opportunities on the global market;
(c)
the value or volume of imports into its territory and exports outside of the Union’s territory of net-zero technologies;
(d)
the progress with respect to the Union level objective of CO2 injection capacity referred to in Article 20 and to the related CO2 transport infrastructure as well as the related CO2 capture activities.
2.   Member States and the national authorities they designate for that purpose shall collect and provide data and other evidence required pursuant to paragraph 1.
In particular, they shall, at least every 3 years collect data on:
(a)
obstacles to trade in net-zero technologies or in goods that use net-zero technologies within the internal market and their potential drivers, including where such obstacles stem from global supply chain disruptions;
(b)
developments in net-zero technologies and market trends, as well as market prices for the respective net-zero technologies, including information on auctions, their frequency, awarding prices, and volume as relevant for fulfilling the requirements of Chapter IV;
(c)
net-zero technology manufacturing capacity and related activities, including data on employment and skills;
(d)
the number of SMEs that are part of net-zero technology manufacturing projects;
(e)
the following information related to permit-granting processes per net-zero technology:
(i)
the number of permit-granting processes initiated, the number of applications refused, and the number of comprehensive decisions taken, specifying whether they approved or refused the project;
(ii)
the duration of the permit-granting processes where a comprehensive decision was taken, including the duration of extensions of the time limits;
(iii)
information on the resources allocated to the operation of the single points of contact;
(f)
the number and nature of net-zero regulatory sandboxes;
(g)
the amount of CO2 stored permanently underground in accordance with Directive 2009/31/EC.
3.   Where they are not already included in, or in accordance with the elements of, the national energy and climate plans, each Member State shall submit to the Commission a report setting out the data referred to in paragraph 2 by 15 March 2027 and every three years thereafter.
4.   The reporting obligation referred to in paragraph 3 of this Article shall not apply where Member States consider that it would be contrary to their essential security interests pursuant to Article 346 TFEU.
5.   The Commission may adopt implementing acts to provide a template for the reports referred to in paragraph 3 of this Article. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 45(2).
6.   On the basis of the reports submitted pursuant to paragraph 3 of this Article, the Commission shall monitor the Union’s progress as referred to in paragraph 1, point (a), of this Article and publish related recommendations as part of the Annual Reports on Competitiveness of Clean Energy Technologies, pursuant to Article 35(2), point (m), of Regulation (EU) 2018/1999. The recommendations shall also consider whether all the net-zero technologies necessary to achieve the objectives laid down in Article 1 of this Regulation are covered by this Regulation.
7.   On the basis of the draft permit applications submitted pursuant to Article 10 of Directive 2009/31/EC and of the reports submitted pursuant to Articles 21(2), 23(4) and 23(6) of this Regulation, the Commission shall monitor the progress towards reaching the Union-wide target for CO2 injection capacity as referred to in paragraph 1, point (d), of this Article. The Commission shall report annually thereon to the European Parliament and to the Council.
8.   The Commission shall inform the Platform on of its findings in relation to this Article.
CHAPTER IX

FINAL PROVISIONS

