Article 38
Establishment and tasks of the net-zero Europe Platform
1.   The net-zero Europe Platform (‘the Platform’) is hereby established.
2.   The Platform shall perform the tasks set out in this Regulation.
3.   The Platform may advise and assist the Commission and Member States with regard to their actions to reach the objectives set out in Chapter I of this Regulation, while avoiding disproportionate administrative burden for Member States where feasible, and taking into account Member States’ national energy and climate plans.
4.   Members of the Platform shall coordinate the Net-Zero Industrial Partnerships within the Platform to help promote the adoption of net-zero technologies globally, to collaborate in the development of innovative net-zero technologies and to support the role of Union industrial capabilities in paving the way for the global clean energy transition, in accordance with the general objective of this Regulation as laid down in Article 1. The Platform may periodically discuss, inter alia:
(a)
how to improve and promote cooperation, knowhow and technology sharing along the net-zero value chain between the Union and third countries;
(b)
the resilience including through enhanced competitiveness of the European industries within the scope of this Regulation in relation to global value chains and recommended actions for enhancement;
(c)
where appropriate, improving consistency between this Regulation and other Union initiatives which could contribute to the objectives of this Regulation and whether to issue recommendations in relation thereto;
(d)
the progress on value chains for net-zero technologies, ongoing technological and industrial changes, and potential future emerging strategic value chains in view of the objectives of this Regulation;
(e)
best practices with regard to the implementation of Section II of Chapter II as well as to Articles 15 and 16 and accelerating the permitting deadlines;
(f)
how to address non-tariff barriers to trade, such as through mutual recognition of conformity assessment or commitments to avoid export restrictions;
(g)
which third countries could be prioritised for the conclusion of Net-Zero Industrial Partnerships, taking into account the following:
(i)
the potential contribution to security of supply, taking into account their manufacturing capacity of net-zero technologies;
(ii)
whether there are existing cooperation agreements between a third country and the Union;
(iii)
whether a third country's regulatory framework and its implementation ensures the monitoring, prevention and minimisation of environmental impacts, the use of socially responsible practices including respect of human and labour rights and meaningful and equitable engagement with local communities, the use of transparent business practices and the prevention of adverse impacts on the proper functioning of public administration and the rule of law;
(iv)
CO2 injection and storage capacities within their territories;
(h)
how to incentivise production of net-zero technologies in the Union, by addressing funding, regulatory framework and investment and location guarantees;
(i)
the assessment of the application of trade measures in net-zero industries.
This paragraph shall be without prejudice to the prerogatives of the Council in accordance with the Treaties in relation to non-binding international instruments.
5.   Member States may support the Commission in the implementation of the cooperation measures set out in the Net-Zero Industrial Partnership.
6.   Taking into account the Commission’s report of 24 October 2023 entitled ‘Progress on competitiveness of clean energy technologies’ and the Commission’s Annual Burden Survey 2022, the Commission shall report to the Platform on the development of the regulatory burden for net-zero industries in the Union.
7.   The Platform shall regularly coordinate with the High-Level Forum on Standardisation to discuss the use of standardisation to support the development of net-zero technologies in the Union.
