Article 46
Evaluation
1.   By 30 June 2028 and every three years thereafter, the Commission shall evaluate this Regulation and present a report on its main findings to the European Parliament, to the Council and to the European Economic and Social Committee.
2.   The evaluation referred to in paragraph 1 shall assess:
(a)
whether the objectives of this Regulation as laid down in Article 1, in particular its contribution to the functioning of the internal market, have been achieved, this Regulation’s impact on business users, in particular SMEs, and end users, and the European Green Deal objectives;
(b)
whether this Regulation is fit to deliver beyond 2030 and towards the longer term 2050 climate neutrality target referred to in Article 1, taking into account, among other aspects, the possibility to include in this Regulation other technologies that can play a significant role in achieving climate neutrality by 2050;
(c)
whether benchmarks for specific technologies are needed in order to achieve the security of supply of those technologies for the Union.
3.   The evaluation shall take into account:
(a)
the result of the monitoring process referred to in Article 42;
(b)
the technology needs stemming from the updates of the national energy and climate plans, including the Strategic Energy Technology Plan, taking into account the most recent State of the Energy Union Report.
4.   Within the same period referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article, as well as after each renewal or update of the national energy and climate plans and after consulting with the Platform, the Commission shall assess the need, and where appropriate submit a proposal, to expand the list of net-zero technologies set out in Article 4.
5.   The competent authorities of the Member States shall provide the Commission with any relevant information they have and that the Commission may require to draw up the report referred to in paragraph 1.
6.   Where, on the basis of the report referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article, the Commission concludes that the Union is likely not to achieve the objectives set out in Article 1(1), it shall, after consulting the Platform, assess the feasibility and proportionality of proposing measures in order to ensure the achievement of those objectives.
7.   By 30 March 2025, the Commission shall adopt a delegated act in accordance with Article 44 to amend the Annex on the basis of the list of net-zero technologies set out in Article 4, in order to identify the sub-categories within net-zero technologies and the list of specific components used for those technologies. That delegated act shall be based on a comprehensive assessment to identify specific essential components that can reasonably be considered to be primarily used for net-zero technologies. That assessment shall be based on a methodological analysis of the supply chains of the net-zero technologies, taking into account, in particular, the commercial availability of the components, the appropriate level of detail and developments in technology. The Commission may review that delegated act on the basis of that assessment.
