Article 2
Scope
1.   This Directive shall apply to parking conditions and facilities and to all situations where special conditions or preferential treatment are offered by public authorities or private operators to persons with disabilities as regards access to the following services, activities and facilities, in the context of a short stay:
(a)
services within the meaning of Article 57 TFEU;
(b)
passenger transport services;
(c)
other activities and facilities, including where not provided for remuneration.
2.   Member States shall apply this Directive for periods longer than a short stay to holders of the European Disability Card or the European Parking Card for persons with disabilities who participate in a Union mobility programme, for the duration of that programme.
Member States may also decide to apply this Directive for periods longer than a short stay to holders of the European Disability Card or European Parking Card for persons with disabilities visiting or staying in their territory.
3.   This Directive does not apply to:
(a)
benefits in the area of social security under Regulations (EC) No 883/2004 and (EC) No 987/2009;
(b)
special contributory or non-contributory cash benefits or benefits in kind in the area of social security, social protection or employment;
(c)
social assistance covered by Article 24(2) of Directive 2004/38/EC;
(d)
remunerated or non-remunerated services that are provided for the long-term inclusion, habilitation or rehabilitation of persons with disabilities;
(e)
special conditions or preferential treatment for access to services offered to persons with disabilities in consideration of their individual needs and upon the fulfilment of additional criteria, on the basis of an individual assessment or of a decision on entitlement to specific services.
4.   This Directive does not affect Member States’ competence to determine the conditions for assessing and recognising disability status or the entitlement to specific services based on a disability, or for granting the right to parking conditions and facilities reserved for persons with disabilities. It does not affect Member States’ competence to issue, at national, regional or local level, a disability certificate, disability card or other formal document for persons with disabilities, including a decision on the entitlement to specific services based on a disability.
5.   This Directive does not affect Member States’ competence to grant, or to require to be granted, specific benefits or special conditions or preferential treatment, such as free access or reduced tariffs for persons with disabilities, including those making use of assistance animals, and for a person or persons accompanying or assisting persons with disabilities, including their personal assistant or assistants.
6.   This Directive shall be without prejudice to the rights that persons with disabilities or a person or persons accompanying or assisting them, including their personal assistant or assistants, or assistance animals may derive from other provisions of Union law or national law implementing Union law, including rights offering specific benefits, special conditions or preferential treatment. A European Disability Card shall not be required as proof of disability in order to access or exercise the rights referred to in this paragraph for which a disability certificate, disability card or other formal document for persons with disabilities may be required in accordance with Union law, unless the relevant Member State decides to merge the national disability certificate, disability card or other formal document for persons with disabilities with the European Disability Card.
