Article 18
Access to information
1.   Member States shall ensure that public authorities make the information on the special conditions or preferential treatment or on parking conditions and facilities that they offer to persons with disabilities pursuant to Articles 5 and 6 publicly available, including through their websites where available, or by other suitable means.
Each Member State shall establish a national website containing general information regarding the objective and the use of the European Disability Card and the European Parking Card for persons with disabilities, including, where appropriate, references to the competent authorities or bodies responsible for issuing, renewing and withdrawing those cards. That website shall also include general information available on special conditions or preferential treatment offered by public authorities for persons with disabilities and redirect users to visit specific websites of relevant public authorities for more specific information. That website may also contain such information from private operators at national level.
2.   Member States shall also encourage private operators to make information on the special conditions or preferential treatment and on parking conditions and facilities they offer pursuant to Articles 5 and 6 publicly available in accessible formats.
3.   The information referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article shall be made available free of charge in a clear, comprehensive, user-friendly and easily accessible way, through the public authorities’ or private operators’ official websites where available, or by other suitable means, in accordance with the relevant accessibility requirements for services as set out in Annex I to Directive (EU) 2019/882.
4.   In accordance with the relevant Union law, where applicable, operators of cross-border passenger transport services shall ensure that clear information is offered or available to passengers holding a European Disability Card on the special conditions or preferential treatment applicable in different parts of their journey.
