Article 17
Exchange of information
1.   With a view to exchanging information, Member States shall take the necessary measures to send the Commission every three years, and for the first time before 30 April 2001, the available representative data on the limit values laid down by specific category of activities in accordance with Annex I and, if appropriate, the best available techniques from which those values are derived in accordance with, in particular, Article 9. On subsequent occasions the data shall be supplemented in accordance with the procedures laid down in paragraph 3 of this Article.
2.   The Commission shall organise an exchange of information between Member States and the industries concerned on best available techniques, associated monitoring, and developments in them.
Every three years the Commission shall publish the results of the exchanges of information.
3.   At intervals of three years, and for the first time for the period 30 October 1999 to 30 October 2002 inclusive, Member States shall send information to the Commission on the implementation of this Directive in the form of a report. The report shall be drawn up on the basis of a questionnaire or outline drafted by the Commission in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 6(2) of Council Directive 91/692/EEC of 23 December 1991 standardising and rationalising reports on the implementation of certain Directives relating to the environment (17). The questionnaire or outline shall be sent to the Member States six months before the start of the period covered by the report. The report shall be submitted to the Commission within nine months of the end of the three-year period covered by it.
The Commission shall publish a Community report on the implementation of the Directive within nine months of receiving the reports from the Member States.
The Commission shall submit the Community report to the European Parliament and to the Council, accompanied by proposals if necessary.
4.   Member States shall establish or designate the authority or authorities which are to be responsible for the exchange of information under paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 and shall inform the Commission accordingly.
