Article 13
Obligations in relation to import of chemicals
1.   The Commission shall immediately forward to the Member States and the Agency any decision guidance documents which it receives from the Secretariat.
The Commission shall, by means of an implementing act, adopt an import decision in the form of a final or interim import response on behalf of the Union concerning the future import of the chemical concerned. That implementing act shall be adopted in accordance with the advisory procedure referred to in Article 27(2). The Commission shall communicate the decision to the Secretariat as soon as possible, and no later than nine months after the date of dispatch of the decision guidance document by the Secretariat.
Where a chemical becomes subject to additional or amended restrictions under Union legislation, the Commission shall, by means of an implementing act, adopt a revised import decision. That implementing act shall be adopted in accordance with the advisory procedure referred to in Article 27(2). The Commission shall communicate the revised import decision to the Secretariat.
2.   In the case of a chemical banned or severely restricted by one or more Member States, the Commission shall, at the written request of the Member States concerned, take the information into account in its import decision.
3.   An import decision under paragraph 1 shall relate to the category or categories specified for the chemical in the decision guidance document.
4.   When communicating the import decision to the Secretariat, the Commission shall provide a description of the legislative or administrative measure upon which it is based.
5.   Each designated national authority of the Member States shall make the import decisions under paragraph 1 available to those concerned within its competence, in accordance with its legislative or administrative measures. The Agency shall make the import decisions under paragraph 1 publicly available by means of the Database.
6.   Where appropriate, the Commission shall evaluate, in close cooperation with the Member States and the Agency, the need to propose measures at Union level in order to prevent any unacceptable risks to human health or the environment within the Union, taking into account the information given in the decision guidance document.
