Article 11
Notification of banned or severely restricted chemicals under the Convention
1.   The Commission shall notify the Secretariat in writing of the chemicals listed in Part 2 of Annex I, which qualify for PIC notification.
2.   Whenever further chemicals are added to Part 2 of Annex I pursuant to the second subparagraph of Article 23(2), the Commission shall notify those chemicals to the Secretariat. That PIC notification shall be submitted as soon as possible after adoption of the relevant final regulatory action at Union level banning or severely restricting the chemical, and no later than 90 days after the date on which the final regulatory action is to be applied.
3.   The PIC notification shall provide all relevant information required in Annex IV.
4.   In determining priorities for notifications, the Commission shall take into account whether the chemical is already listed in Part 3 of Annex I, the extent to which the information requirements laid down in Annex IV can be met, and the severity of the risks presented by the chemical, in particular for developing countries.
Where a chemical qualifies for PIC notification, but the information is insufficient to meet the requirements of Annex IV, identified exporters or importers shall, upon request by the Commission, provide all relevant information available to them, including that from other national or international chemical control programmes, within 60 days of the request.
5.   The Commission shall notify the Secretariat in writing when a final regulatory action notified under paragraphs 1 or 2 is amended as soon as possible after adoption of the new final regulatory action, and no later than 60 days after the date on which the new final regulatory action is to be applied.
The Commission shall provide all relevant information that was not available at the time the initial notification was made under paragraphs 1 or 2 respectively.
6.   At the request of any Party or the Secretariat, the Commission shall provide additional information concerning the chemical or the final regulatory action, as far as practicable.
The Member States and the Agency shall, upon request, assist the Commission as necessary in compiling that information.
7.   The Commission shall forward immediately to the Member States and the Agency information that it receives from the Secretariat regarding chemicals notified as banned or severely restricted by other Parties.
Where appropriate, the Commission shall evaluate, in close cooperation with the Member States and the Agency, the need to propose measures at Union level in order to prevent any unacceptable risks to human health or the environment within the Union.
8.   Where a Member State takes national final regulatory action in accordance with the relevant Union legislation to ban or severely restrict a chemical, it shall provide the Commission with relevant information. The Commission shall make that information available to the Member States. Within four weeks of that information having been made available, Member States may send comments on a possible PIC notification, including, in particular, relevant information about their national regulatory position in respect of the chemical to the Commission and to the Member State which submitted the national final regulatory action. After consideration of the comments, the submitting Member State shall inform the Commission whether the latter has to:
(a)
make a PIC notification to the Secretariat, pursuant to this Article; or
(b)
provide the information to the Secretariat, pursuant to Article 12.
