Article 8
Export notifications forwarded to Parties and other countries
1.   In the case of substances listed in Part 1 of Annex I or mixtures containing such substances in a concentration that triggers labelling obligations under Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008 irrespective of the presence of any other substances, paragraphs 2 to 8 of this Article shall apply regardless of the intended use of the chemical in the importing Party or other country.
2.   When an exporter is due to export a chemical referred to in paragraph 1 from the Union to a Party or other country for the first time on or after the date on which it becomes subject to this Regulation, the exporter shall notify the designated national authority of the Member State in which he is established (the ‘exporter’s Member State’), no later than 35 days before the expected date of export. Thereafter the exporter shall notify that designated national authority of the first export of the chemical each calendar year no later than 35 days before the export takes place. The notifications shall comply with the information requirements laid down in Annex II and shall be made available to the Commission and to the Member States by means of the Database.
The designated national authority of the exporter’s Member State shall check compliance of the information with Annex II and if the notification is complete forward it to the Agency no later than 25 days before the expected date of export.
The Agency shall, on behalf of the Commission, transmit the notification to the designated national authority of the importing Party or the appropriate authority of the importing other country and take the measures necessary to ensure that they receive that notification no later than 15 days before the first intended export of the chemical and thereafter no later than 15 days before the first export in any subsequent calendar year.
The Agency shall register each export notification and assign it a reference identification number in the Database. The Agency shall also make available to the public and the designated national authorities of the Member States, as appropriate, an updated list of the chemicals concerned and the importing Parties and other countries for each calendar year by means of the Database.
3.   If the Agency does not receive from the importing Party or other country an acknowledgement of receipt of the first export notification made after the chemical is included in Part 1 of Annex I within 30 days of the dispatch of such notification, it shall, on behalf of the Commission, submit a second notification. The Agency shall, on behalf of the Commission, make reasonable efforts to ensure that the designated national authority of the importing Party or the appropriate authority of the importing other country receives the second notification.
4.   A new export notification shall be made in accordance with paragraph 2 for exports which take place subsequent to the entry into force of amendments to Union legislation concerning the marketing, use or labelling of the substances in question or whenever the composition of the mixture in question changes so that the labelling of such mixture is altered. The new notification shall comply with the information requirements laid down in Annex II and shall indicate that it is a revision of a previous notification.
5.   Where the export of a chemical relates to an emergency situation in which any delay may endanger public health or the environment in the importing Party or other country, an exemption from the obligations set out in paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 in whole or in part may be granted at the reasoned request of the exporter or the importing Party or other country and at the discretion of the designated national authority of the exporter’s Member State, in consultation with the Commission assisted by the Agency. A decision on the request shall be considered to have been made in consultation with the Commission if there is no dissenting response from the Commission within 10 days of the designated national authority of the Member State sending it details of the request.
6.   Without prejudice to the obligations set out in Article 19(2), the obligations set out in paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 of this Article shall cease when all of the following conditions are fulfilled:
(a)
the chemical has become a chemical subject to the PIC procedure;
(b)
the importing country is a Party to the Convention and has provided the Secretariat with a response in accordance with Article 10(2) of the Convention indicating whether or not it consents to import of the chemical; and
(c)
the Commission has been informed of that response by the Secretariat and has forwarded that information to the Member States and the Agency.
Notwithstanding the first subparagraph of this paragraph, the obligations set out in paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 of this Article shall not cease where an importing country is a Party to the Convention and explicitly requires continued export notification by exporting Parties, for example through its import decision or otherwise.
Without prejudice to the obligations set out in Article 19(2), the obligations set out in paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 of this Article shall also cease when both of the following conditions are fulfilled:
(a)
the designated national authority of the importing Party or the appropriate authority of the importing other country has waived the requirement to be notified before the export of the chemical; and
(b)
the Commission has received the information from the Secretariat or from the designated national authority of the importing Party or the appropriate authority of the importing other country and has forwarded it to the Member States and the Agency, which has made it available by means of the Database.
7.   The Commission, the relevant designated national authorities of the Member States, the Agency and the exporters shall, on request, provide importing Parties and other countries with available additional information concerning the exported chemicals.
8.   Member States may establish, in a transparent manner, systems obliging exporters to pay an administrative fee for each export notification made and for each request for explicit consent made, corresponding to the costs they incur in carrying out the procedures set out in paragraphs 2 and 4 of this Article and in Article 14(6) and (7).
