Article 5
Calculation of the share of energy from renewable sources
1.   The gross final consumption of energy from renewable sources in each Member State shall be calculated as the sum of:
(a)
gross final consumption of electricity from renewable energy sources;
(b)
gross final consumption of energy from renewable sources for heating and cooling; and
(c)
final consumption of energy from renewable sources in transport.
Gas, electricity and hydrogen from renewable energy sources shall be considered only once in point (a), (b), or (c) of the first subparagraph, for calculating the share of gross final consumption of energy from renewable sources.
Subject to the second subparagraph of Article 17(1), biofuels and bioliquids that do not fulfil the sustainability criteria set out in Article 17(2) to (6) shall not be taken into account.
2.   Where a Member State considers that, due to force majeure, it is impossible for it to meet its share of energy from renewable sources in gross final consumption of energy in 2020 set out in the third column of the table in Annex I, it shall inform the Commission accordingly as soon as possible. The Commission shall adopt a decision on whether force majeure has been demonstrated. In the event that the Commission decides that force majeure has been demonstrated, it shall determine what adjustment shall be made to the Member State’s gross final consumption of energy from renewable sources for the year 2020.
3.   For the purposes of paragraph 1(a), gross final consumption of electricity from renewable energy sources shall be calculated as the quantity of electricity produced in a Member State from renewable energy sources, excluding the production of electricity in pumped storage units from water that has previously been pumped uphill.
In multi-fuel plants using renewable and conventional sources, only the part of electricity produced from renewable energy sources shall be taken into account. For the purposes of this calculation, the contribution of each energy source shall be calculated on the basis of its energy content.
The electricity generated by hydropower and wind power shall be accounted for in accordance with the normalisation rules set out in Annex II.
4.   For the purposes of paragraph 1(b), the gross final consumption of energy from renewable sources for heating and cooling shall be calculated as the quantity of district heating and cooling produced in a Member State from renewable sources, plus the consumption of other energy from renewable sources in industry, households, services, agriculture, forestry and fisheries, for heating, cooling and processing purposes.
In multi-fuel plants using renewable and conventional sources, only the part of heating and cooling produced from renewable energy sources shall be taken into account. For the purposes of this calculation, the contribution of each energy source shall be calculated on the basis of its energy content.
Aerothermal, geothermal and hydrothermal heat energy captured by heat pumps shall be taken into account for the purposes of paragraph 1(b) provided that the final energy output significantly exceeds the primary energy input required to drive the heat pumps. The quantity of heat to be considered as energy from renewable sources for the purposes of this Directive shall be calculated in accordance with the methodology laid down in Annex VII.
Thermal energy generated by passive energy systems, under which lower energy consumption is achieved passively through building design or from heat generated by energy from non-renewable sources, shall not be taken into account for the purposes of paragraph 1(b).
5.   The energy content of the transport fuels listed in Annex III shall be taken to be as set out in that Annex. Annex III may be adapted to technical and scientific progress. Those measures, designed to amend non-essential elements of this Directive, shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 25(4).
6.   The share of energy from renewable sources shall be calculated as the gross final consumption of energy from renewable sources divided by the gross final consumption of energy from all energy sources, expressed as a percentage.
For the purposes of the first subparagraph, the sum referred to in paragraph 1 shall be adjusted in accordance with Articles 6, 8, 10 and 11.
In calculating a Member State’s gross final energy consumption for the purpose of measuring its compliance with the targets and indicative trajectory laid down in this Directive, the amount of energy consumed in aviation shall, as a proportion of that Member State’s gross final consumption of energy, be considered to be no more than 6,18 %. For Cyprus and Malta the amount of energy consumed in aviation shall, as a proportion of those Member States’ gross final consumption of energy, be considered to be no more than 4,12 %.
7.   The methodology and definitions used in the calculation of the share of energy from renewable sources shall be those of Regulation (EC) No 1099/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 October 2008 on energy statistics (19).
Member States shall ensure coherence of statistical information used in calculating those sectoral and overall shares and statistical information reported to the Commission under Regulation (EC) No 1099/2008.
