Article 3
1. (a) Member States should ensure that a minimum proportion of biofuels and other renewable fuels is placed on their markets, and, to that effect, shall set national indicative targets.
(b) (i) A reference value for these targets shall be 2 %, calculated on the basis of energy content, of all petrol and diesel for transport purposes placed on their markets by 31 December 2005.
(ii) A reference value for these targets shall be 5,75 %, calculated on the basis of energy content, of all petrol and diesel for transport purposes placed on their markets by 31 December 2010.
2. Biofuels may be made available in any of the following forms:
(a) as pure biofuels or at high concentration in mineral oil derivatives, in accordance with specific quality standards for transport applications;
(b) as biofuels blended in mineral oil derivatives, in accordance with the appropriate European norms describing the technical specifications for transport fuels (EN 228 and EN 590);
(c) as liquids derived from biofuels, such as ETBE (ethyl-tertio-butyl-ether), where the percentage of biofuel is as specified in Article 2(2).
3. Member States shall monitor the effect of the use of biofuels in diesel blends above 5 % by non-adapted vehicles and shall, where appropriate, take measures to ensure compliance with the relevant Community legislation on emission standards.
4. In the measures that they take, the Member States should consider the overall climate and environmental balance of the various types of biofuels and other renewable fuels and may give priority to the promotion of those fuels showing a very good cost-effective environmental balance, while also taking into account competitiveness and security of supply.
5. Member States shall ensure that information is given to the public on the availability of biofuels and other renewable fuels. For percentages of biofuels, blended in mineral oil derivatives, exceeding the limit value of 5 % of fatty acid methyl ester (FAME) or of 5 % of bioethanol, a specific labelling at the sales points shall be imposed.

