Whereas:
(1) The European Council meeting at Gothenburg on 15 and 16 June 2001 agreed on a Community strategy for sustainable development consisting in a set of measures, which include the development of biofuels.
(2) Natural resources, and their prudent and rational utilisation as referred to in Article 174(1) of the Treaty, include oil, natural gas and solid fuels, which are essential sources of energy but also the leading sources of carbon dioxide emissions.
(3) However, there is a wide range of biomass that could be used to produce biofuels, deriving from agricultural and forestry products, as well as from residues and waste from forestry and the forestry and agrifoodstuffs industry.
(4) The transport sector accounts for more than 30 % of final energy consumption in the Community and is expanding, a trend which is bound to increase, along with carbon dioxide emissions and this expansion will be greater in percentage terms in the candidate countries following their accession to the European Union.
(5) The Commission White Paper "European transport policy for 2010: time to decide" expects CO2 emissions from transport to rise by 50 % between 1990 and 2010, to around 1113 million tonnes, the main responsibility resting with road transport, which accounts for 84 % of transport-related CO2 emissions. From an ecological point of view, the White Paper therefore calls for dependence on oil (currently 98 %) in the transport sector to be reduced by using alternative fuels such as biofuels.
(6) Greater use of biofuels for transport forms a part of the package of measures needed to comply with the Kyoto Protocol, and of any policy package to meet further commitments in this respect.
(7) Increased use of biofuels for transport, without ruling out other possible alternative fuels, including automotive LPG and CNG, is one of the tools by which the Community can reduce its dependence on imported energy and influence the fuel market for transport and hence the security of energy supply in the medium and long term. However, this consideration should not detract in any way from the importance of compliance with Community legislation on fuel quality, vehicle emissions and air quality.
(8) As a result of technological advances, most vehicles currently in circulation in the European Union are capable of using a low biofuel blend without any problem. The most recent technological developments make it possible to use higher percentages of biofuel in the blend. Some countries are already using biofuel blends of 10 % and higher.
(9) Captive fleets offer the potential of using a higher concentration of biofuels. In some cities captive fleets are already operating on pure biofuels and, in some cases, this has helped to improve air quality in urban areas. Member States could therefore further promote the use of biofuels in public transport modes.
(10) Promoting the use of biofuels in transport constitutes a step towards a wider application of biomass which will enable biofuel to be more extensively developed in the future, whilst not excluding other options and, in particular, the hydrogen option.
(11) The research policy pursued by the Member States relating to increased use of biofuels should incorporate the hydrogen sector to a significant degree and promote this option, taking into account the relevant Community framework programmes.
(12) Pure vegetable oil from oil plants produced through pressing, extraction or comparable procedures, crude or refined but chemically unmodified, can also be used as biofuel in specific cases where its use is compatible with the type of engines involved and the corresponding emission requirements.
(13) New types of fuel should conform to recognised technical standards if they are to be accepted to a greater extent by customers and vehicle manufacturers and hence penetrate the market. Technical standards also form the basis for requirements concerning emissions and the monitoring of emissions. Difficulties may be encountered in ensuring that new types of fuel meet current technical standards, which, to a large extent, have been developed for conventional fossil fuels. The Commission and standardisation bodies should monitor developments and adapt and develop actively standards, particularly volatility aspects, so that new types of fuel can be introduced, whilst maintaining environmental performance requirements.
(14) Bioethanol and biodiesel, when used for vehicles in pure form or as a blend, should comply with the quality standards laid down to ensure optimum engine performance. It is noted that in the case of biodiesel for diesel engines, where the processing option is esterification, the standard prEN 14214 of the European Committee for Standardisation (CEN) on fatty acid methyl esters (FAME) could be applied. Accordingly, the CEN should establish appropriate standards for other transport biofuel products in the European Union.
(15) Promoting the use of biofuels in keeping with sustainable farming and forestry practices laid down in the rules governing the common agricultural policy could create new opportunities for sustainable rural development in a more market-orientated common agriculture policy geared more to the European market and to respect for flourishing country life and multifunctional agriculture, and could open a new market for innovative agricultural products with regard to present and future Member States.
(16) In its resolution of 8 June 1998(5), the Council endorsed the Commission's strategy and action plan for renewable energy sources and requested specific measures in the biofuels sector.
(17) The Commission Green Paper "Towards a European strategy for the security of energy supply" sets the objective of 20 % substitution of conventional fuels by alternative fuels in the road transport sector by the year 2020.
(18) Alternative fuels will only be able to achieve market penetration if they are widely available and competitive.
(19) In its resolution of 18 June 1998(6), the European Parliament called for an increase in the market share of biofuels to 2 % over five years through a package of measures, including tax exemption, financial assistance for the processing industry and the establishment of a compulsory rate of biofuels for oil companies.
(20) The optimum method for increasing the share of biofuels in the national and Community markets depends on the availability of resources and raw materials, on national and Community policies to promote biofuels and on tax arrangements, and on the appropriate involvement of all stakeholders/parties.
(21) National policies to promote the use of biofuels should not lead to prohibition of the free movement of fuels that meet the harmonised environmental specifications as laid down in Community legislation.
(22) Promotion of the production and use of biofuels could contribute to a reduction in energy import dependency and in emissions of greenhouse gases. In addition, biofuels, in pure form or as a blend, may in principle be used in existing motor vehicles and use the current motor vehicle fuel distribution system. The blending of biofuel with fossil fuels could facilitate a potential cost reduction in the distribution system in the Community.
(23) Since the objective of the proposed action, namely the introduction of general principles providing for a minimum percentage of biofuels to be marketed and distributed, cannot be achieved sufficiently by the Member States by reason of the scale of the action, and can therefore be achieved better at Community level, the Community may adopt measures, in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity as set out in Article 5 of the Treaty. In accordance with the principle of proportionality, as set out in that Article, this Directive does not go beyond what is necessary in order to achieve that objective.
(24) Research and technological development in the field of the sustainability of biofuels should be promoted.
(25) An increase in the use of biofuels should be accompanied by a detailed analysis of the environmental, economic and social impact in order to decide whether it is advisable to increase the proportion of biofuels in relation to conventional fuels.
(26) Provision should be made for the possibility of adapting rapidly the list of biofuels, the percentage of renewable contents, and the schedule for introducing biofuels in the transport fuel market, to technical progress and to the results of an environmental impact assessment of the first phase of introduction.
(27) Measures should be introduced for developing rapidly the quality standards for the biofuels to be used in the automotive sector, both as pure biofuels and as a blending component in the conventional fuels. Although the biodegradable fraction of waste is a potentially useful source for producing biofuels, the quality standard has to take into account the possible contamination present in the waste to avoid special components damaging the vehicle or causing emissions to deteriorate.
(28) Encouragement of the promotion of biofuels should be consistent with security of supply and environmental objectives and related policy objectives and measures within each Member State. In doing so, Member States may consider cost-effective ways of publicising the possibilities of using biofuels.
(29) The measures necessary for the implementation of this Directive should be adopted in accordance with Council Decision 1999/468/EC of 28 June 1999 laying down the procedures for the exercise of implementing powers conferred on the Commission(7),
HAVE ADOPTED THIS DIRECTIVE:

