Article 27
Levels or classes of performance
1.   The Commission may adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 60, to establish classes of performance in relation to the essential characteristics of construction products.
2.   Where the Commission has established classes of performance in relation to the essential characteristics of construction products, the European standardisation bodies shall use those classes in harmonised standards. The organisation of TABs shall where relevant use those classes in European Assessment Documents.
Where classes of performance in relation to the essential characteristics of construction products are not established by the Commission, they may be established by the European standardisation bodies in harmonised standards, on the basis of a revised mandate.
3.   When provided for in the relevant mandates, the European standardisation bodies shall establish in harmonised standards threshold levels in relation to essential characteristics and, when appropriate, for intended uses, to be fulfilled by construction products in Member States.
4.   Where the European standardisation bodies have established classes of performance in a harmonised standard, the organisation of TABs shall use those classes in the European Assessment Documents where they are relevant for the construction product.
When deemed appropriate, the organisation of TABs may, with the agreement of the Commission and after consulting the Standing Committee on Construction, establish in the European Assessment Document classes of performance and threshold levels in relation to the essential characteristics of a construction product within its intended use as foreseen by the manufacturer.
5.   The Commission may adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 60, to establish conditions under which a construction product shall be deemed to satisfy a certain level or class of performance without testing or without further testing.
Where such conditions are not established by the Commission, they may be established by the European standardisation bodies in harmonised standards, on the basis of a revised mandate.
6.   When the Commission has established classification systems in accordance with paragraph 1, Member States may determine the levels or classes of performance to be respected by construction products in relation to their essential characteristics only in accordance with those classification systems.
7.   The European standardisation bodies and the organisation of TABs shall respect the regulatory needs of Member States when determining threshold levels or classes of performance.
