Article 31
Coordination of TABs
1.   The TABs shall establish an organisation for technical assessment.
2.   The organisation of TABs shall be considered a body pursuing an aim of general European interest within the meaning of Article 162 of Commission Regulation (EC, Euratom) No 2342/2002 of 23 December 2002 laying down detailed rules for the implementation of Council Regulation (EC, Euratom) No 1605/2002 on the Financial Regulation applicable to the general budget of the European Communities (15).
3.   The common cooperation objectives and the administrative and financial conditions relating to the grants awarded to the organisation of TABs may be defined in a framework partnership agreement signed by the Commission and that organisation, in accordance with Council Regulation (EC, Euratom) No 1605/2002 of 25 June 2002 on the Financial Regulation applicable to the general budget of the European Communities (16) (the Financial Regulation) and Regulation (EC, Euratom) No 2342/2002. The European Parliament and the Council shall be informed of the conclusion of any such agreement.
4.   The organisation of TABs shall at least carry out the following tasks:
(a)
organise the coordination of the TABs and, if necessary, ensure cooperation and consultation with other stakeholders;
(b)
ensure that examples of best practice are shared between TABs to promote greater efficiency and provide a better service to industry;
(c)
coordinate the application of the procedures set out in Article 21 and in Annex II, as well as provide the support needed to that end;
(d)
develop and adopt European Assessment Documents;
(e)
inform the Commission of any question related to the preparation of European Assessment Documents and of any aspects related to the interpretation of the procedures set out in Article 21 and in Annex II and suggest improvements to the Commission based on experience gained;
(f)
communicate any observations concerning a TAB not fulfilling its tasks in accordance with the procedures set out in Article 21 and in Annex II to the Commission and the Member State which designated the TAB;
(g)
ensure that adopted European Assessment Documents and references to European Technical Assessments are kept publicly available.
The organisation of TABs shall have a Secretariat in order to carry out these tasks.
5.   Member States shall ensure that the TABs contribute with financial and human resources to the organisation of TABs.
