Article 6
Content of the declaration of performance
1.   The declaration of performance shall express the performance of construction products in relation to the essential characteristics of those products in accordance with the relevant harmonised technical specifications.
2.   The declaration of performance shall contain, in particular, the following information:
(a)
the reference of the product-type for which the declaration of performance has been drawn up;
(b)
the system or systems of assessment and verification of constancy of performance of the construction product, as set out in Annex V;
(c)
the reference number and date of issue of the harmonised standard or the European Technical Assessment which has been used for the assessment of each essential characteristic;
(d)
where applicable, the reference number of the Specific Technical Documentation used and the requirements with which the manufacturer claims the product complies.
3.   The declaration of performance shall in addition contain:
(a)
the intended use or uses for the construction product, in accordance with the applicable harmonised technical specification;
(b)
the list of essential characteristics, as determined in the harmonised technical specification for the declared intended use or uses;
(c)
the performance of at least one of the essential characteristics of the construction product, relevant for the declared intended use or uses;
(d)
where applicable, the performance of the construction product, by levels or classes, or in a description, if necessary based on a calculation in relation to its essential characteristics determined in accordance with Article 3(3);
(e)
the performance of those essential characteristics of the construction product which are related to the intended use or uses, taking into consideration the provisions in relation to the intended use or uses where the manufacturer intends the product to be made available on the market;
(f)
for the listed essential characteristics for which no performance is declared, the letters ‘NPD’ (No Performance Determined);
(g)
when a European Technical Assessment has been issued for that product, the performance, by levels or classes, or in a description, of the construction product in relation to all essential characteristics contained in the corresponding European Technical Assessment.
4.   The declaration of performance shall be drawn up using the model set out in Annex III.
5.   The information referred to in Article 31 or, as the case may be, in Article 33 of Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006, shall be provided together with the declaration of performance.
