Article 11
Obligations of manufacturers
1.   Manufacturers shall draw up a declaration of performance in accordance with Articles 4 and 6, and affix the CE marking in accordance with Articles 8 and 9.
Manufacturers shall, as the basis for the declaration of performance, draw up technical documentation describing all the relevant elements related to the required system of assessment and verification of constancy of performance.
2.   Manufacturers shall keep the technical documentation and the declaration of performance for a period of 10 years after the construction product has been placed on the market.
Where appropriate, the Commission may, by means of delegated acts in accordance with Article 60, amend that period for families of construction products on the basis of the expected life or part played by the construction product in the construction works.
3.   Manufacturers shall ensure that procedures are in place to ensure that series production maintains the declared performance. Changes in the product-type and in the applicable harmonised technical specifications shall be adequately taken into account.
Manufacturers shall, where deemed appropriate with regard to ensuring the accuracy, reliability and stability of the declared performance of a construction product, carry out sample testing of construction products placed or made available on the market, investigate, and, if necessary, keep a register of complaints, of non-conforming products and of product recalls, and keep distributors informed of any such monitoring.
4.   Manufacturers shall ensure that their construction products bear a type, batch or serial number or any other element allowing their identification, or, where the size or nature of the product does not allow it, that the required information is provided on the packaging or in a document accompanying the construction product.
5.   Manufacturers shall indicate on the construction product or, where that is not possible, on its packaging or in a document accompanying it, their name, registered trade name or registered trade mark and their contact address. The address shall indicate a single point at which the manufacturer can be contacted.
6.   When making a construction product available on the market, manufacturers shall ensure that the product is accompanied by instructions and safety information in a language determined by the Member State concerned which can be easily understood by users.
7.   Manufacturers who consider or have reason to believe that a construction product which they have placed on the market is not in conformity with the declaration of performance or not in compliance with other applicable requirements in this Regulation, shall immediately take the necessary corrective measures to bring that construction product into conformity, or, if appropriate, to withdraw or recall it. Furthermore, where the product presents a risk, manufacturers shall immediately inform the competent national authorities of the Member States in which they made the construction product available to that effect, giving details, in particular, of the non-compliance and of any corrective measures taken.
8.   Manufacturers shall, further to a reasoned request from a competent national authority, provide it with all the information and documentation necessary to demonstrate the conformity of the construction product with the declaration of performance and compliance with other applicable requirements in this Regulation, in a language which can be easily understood by that authority. They shall cooperate with that authority, at its request, on any action taken to eliminate the risks posed by construction products which they have placed on the market.
