Article 14
Obligations of distributors
1.   When making a construction product available on the market, distributors shall act with due care in relation to the requirements of this Regulation.
2.   Before making a construction product available on the market distributors shall ensure that the product, where required, bears the CE marking and is accompanied by the documents required under this Regulation and by instructions and safety information in a language determined by the Member State concerned which can be easily understood by users. Distributors shall also ensure that the manufacturer and the importer have complied with the requirements set out in Article 11(4) and (5) and Article 13(3) respectively.
Where a distributor considers or has reason to believe that a construction product is not in conformity with the declaration of performance or not in compliance with other applicable requirements in this Regulation, the distributor shall not make the product available on the market until it conforms to the accompanying declaration of performance and it complies with the other applicable requirements in this Regulation or until the declaration of performance is corrected. Furthermore, where the product presents a risk, the distributor shall inform the manufacturer or the importer thereof, and the market surveillance authorities.
3.   A distributor shall ensure that, while a construction product is under his responsibility, storage or transport conditions do not jeopardise its conformity with the declaration of performance and compliance with other applicable requirements in this Regulation.
4.   Distributors who consider or have reason to believe that a construction product which they have made available on the market is not in conformity with the declaration of performance or not in compliance with other applicable requirements in this Regulation, shall make sure that the corrective measures necessary to bring that product in conformity, to withdraw it or recall it, as appropriate, are taken. Furthermore, where the product presents a risk, distributors shall immediately inform the competent national authorities of the Member States in which they made the product available thereof, giving details, in particular, of the non-compliance and of any corrective measures taken.
5.   Distributors shall, further to a reasoned request from a competent national authority, provide it with all the information and documentation necessary to demonstrate the conformity of the construction product with the declaration of performance and compliance with other applicable requirements in this Regulation in a language which can be easily understood by that authority. They shall cooperate with that authority, at its request, on any action taken to eliminate the risks posed by construction products which they have made available on the market.
