Article 9
Authorisations
1.   In exceptional cases, for reasons of compelling public interest, including those of a social or economic nature, Member States may issue permits allowing establishments to carry out activities other than those set out in Article 8(1) subject to authorisation by the Commission, in accordance with the procedure laid down in this Article and subject to the conditions set out in Article 8(2) and (3).
2.   The Commission shall set up and operate an electronic authorisation system and shall decide on applications for authorisation within 60 days of receipt of an application.
3.   Applications for authorisation shall be submitted by Member States using the system referred to in paragraph 2.
4.   An application for an authorisation shall include the following:
(a)
details of the establishment or groups of establishments including their name and address;
(b)
the scientific and common names of the invasive alien species of Union concern for which an authorisation is requested;
(c)
the codes of Combined Nomenclature as provided by Regulation (EEC) No 2658/87;
(d)
the number or the volume of specimens concerned;
(e)
the reasons for the requested authorisation;
(f)
a detailed description of the envisaged measures to ensure that escape or spread are not possible from contained holding facilities in which the invasive alien species of Union concern is to be kept in and handled, as well as of the measures to ensure that any transport of the species that may be necessary is carried out under conditions that exclude escape;
(g)
an assessment of the risk of escape of the invasive alien species of Union concern for which an authorisation is requested, accompanied by a description of the risk mitigation measures to be put in place;
(h)
a description of the surveillance system planned and of the contingency plan drawn to cater for possible escape or spread, including an eradication plan where necessary;
(i)
a description of relevant national law applicable to those establishments.
5.   Authorisations granted by the Commission shall be notified to the competent authority of the Member State concerned. An authorisation shall be specific to an individual establishment, irrespective of the application procedure followed in accordance with point (a) of paragraph 4, and shall include the information referred to in paragraph 4 and the duration of the authorisation. An authorisation shall also include provisions regarding the supply to the establishment of additional or replacement specimens for use in the activity for which that authorisation is requested.
6.   Following an authorisation by the Commission, the competent authority may issue the permit referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article in accordance with Article 8(4) to (8). The permit shall include all provisions specified in the authorisation issued by the Commission.
7.   The Commission shall reject an application for an authorisation if any relevant obligations set out in this Regulation are not complied with.
8.   The Commission shall, as soon as possible, inform the Member State concerned of any rejection of an application pursuant to paragraph 7 and shall specify the reason for the rejection.
