Article 10
Emergency measures
1.   Where a Member State has evidence concerning the presence in, or imminent risk of introduction into its territory of an invasive alien species, which is not included on the Union list but which the competent authorities have found, on the basis of preliminary scientific evidence, to be likely to meet the criteria set out in Article 4(3), it may immediately take emergency measures, consisting of any of the restrictions set out in Article 7(1).
2.   The Member State introducing emergency measures in its national territory which include the application of points (a), (d) or (e) of Article 7(1) shall immediately notify the Commission and all other Member States of the measures taken and the evidence justifying those measures.
3.   The Member State concerned shall without delay carry out a risk assessment pursuant to Article 5 for the invasive alien species subject to the emergency measures, given the available technical and scientific information, and in any case within 24 months from the date of the adoption of the decision to introduce emergency measures, with a view to include that species on the Union list.
4.   Where the Commission receives the notification referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article or has other evidence concerning the presence in or imminent risk of introduction into the Union of an invasive alien species which is not included on the Union list, but is likely to meet the criteria set out in Article 4(3), it shall, by means of implementing acts, conclude, on the basis of preliminary scientific evidence, whether the species is likely to meet those criteria and adopt emergency measures for the Union consisting of any of the restrictions set out in Article 7(1) for a limited time as regards the risks posed by that species, where it concludes that the criteria set out in Article 4(3) are likely to be fulfilled. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 27(2).
5.   Where the Commission adopts an implementing act referred to in paragraph 4, Member States shall repeal or amend, as appropriate, any emergency measures which they have taken.
6.   Where the Commission includes the invasive alien species on the Union list, Member States shall also repeal or amend their emergency measures.
7.   When, following the risk assessment carried out pursuant to paragraph 3 of this Article, the Commission does not include the invasive alien species on the Union list, Member States shall repeal their emergency measures taken pursuant to paragraph 1 of this Article and may include that species on a national list of invasive alien species of Member State concern, pursuant to Article 12(1), and consider enhanced regional cooperation in accordance with Article 11.
