Article 18
Derogations from the obligation of rapid eradication
1.   A Member State may, based on robust scientific evidence, decide, within two months of the detection of an invasive alien species referred to in Article 16, not to apply eradication measures if at least one of the following conditions is met:
(a)
eradication is demonstrated to be technically unfeasible because the eradication methods available cannot be applied in the environment where the invasive alien species is established;
(b)
a cost-benefit analysis demonstrates on the basis of the available data with reasonable certainty that the costs will, in the long term, be exceptionally high and disproportionate to the benefits of eradication;
(c)
eradication methods are not available or are available but have very serious adverse impact on human health, the environment or other species.
The Member State concerned shall without delay notify the Commission of its decision in writing. The notification shall be accompanied by all the evidence referred to in points (a), (b) and (c) of the first subparagraph.
2.   The Commission may decide, by means of implementing acts, to reject the decision notified in accordance with the second subparagraph of paragraph 1 where the conditions set out therein are not met.
3.   Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 27(2). The draft implementing acts shall be submitted to the Committee referred to in Article 27(1) within two months of receipt of the Member State's notification.
4.   Member States shall ensure that containment measures are in place to avoid further spread of the invasive alien species to other Member States when, pursuant to paragraph 1, no eradication measures are applied.
5.   Where the Commission rejects a decision notified in accordance with the second subparagraph of paragraph 1 of this Article, the Member State concerned shall apply the eradication measures referred to in Article 17 without delay.
6.   Where the Commission does not reject a decision notified in accordance with the second subparagraph of paragraph 1 of this Article, the invasive alien species shall be subject to the management measures referred to in Article 19.
