Article 13
Action plans on the pathways of invasive alien species
1.   Member States shall, within 18 months of the adoption of the Union list carry out a comprehensive analysis of the pathways of unintentional introduction and spread of invasive alien species of Union concern at least in their territory, as well as in their marine waters as defined in point (1) of Article 3 of Directive 2008/56/EC, and identify the pathways which require priority action ('priority pathways') because of the volume of species or of the potential damage caused by the species entering the Union through those pathways.
2.   Within three years of the adoption of the Union list, each Member State shall establish and implement one single action plan or a set of action plans to address the priority pathways it has identified pursuant to paragraph 1. Action plans shall include timetables for action and shall describe the measures to be adopted and, as appropriate, voluntary actions and codes of good practice, to address the priority pathways and to prevent the unintentional introduction and spread of invasive alien species into or within the Union.
3.   Member States shall ensure coordination with the aim of establishing one single action plan or a set of action plans coordinated at the appropriate regional level in accordance with Article 22(1). Where such regional action plans are not established, Member States shall establish and implement action plans for their territory and as far as possible coordinated at the appropriate regional level.
4.   The action plans referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article shall include, in particular, measures based on an analysis of costs and benefits, in order to:
(a)
raise awareness;
(b)
minimise contamination of goods, commodities, vehicles and equipment by specimens of invasive alien species, including measures to tackle transportation of invasive alien species from third countries;
(c)
ensure appropriate checks at the Union borders, other than the official controls pursuant to Article 15.
5.   The action plans established in accordance with paragraph 2 shall be transmitted to the Commission without delay. Member States shall review their action plans and transmit them to the Commission at least every six years.
