Article 24
Reporting and review
1.   By 1 June 2019, and every six years thereafter, Member States shall update and transmit to the Commission the following:
(a)
a description, or an updated version thereof, of the surveillance system pursuant to Article 14 and of the official control system on alien species entering the Union pursuant to Article 15;
(b)
the distribution of the invasive alien species of Union concern or regional concern in accordance with Article 11(2) present in their territory, including information regarding migratory or reproductive patterns;
(c)
information about the species considered as invasive alien species of Member State concern pursuant to Article 12(2);
(d)
the action plans referred to in Article 13(2);
(e)
aggregated information covering the entire national territory on the eradication measures taken in accordance with Article 17, the management measures undertaken in accordance with Article 19, their effectiveness, and their impact on non-targeted species;
(f)
the number of the permits referred to in Article 8 and the purpose for which they were issued;
(g)
measures taken to inform the public about the presence of an invasive alien species and any actions that citizens have been requested to take;
(h)
the inspections required under Article 8(8); and
(i)
information on the cost of action undertaken to comply with this Regulation, when available.
2.   By 5 November 2015, Member States shall notify the Commission and inform the other Member States of the competent authorities in charge of applying this Regulation.
3.   By 1 June 2021, the Commission shall review the application of this Regulation including the Union list, the action plans referred to in Article 13(2), the surveillance system, customs controls, eradication obligation and management obligations, and submit a report to the European Parliament and to the Council, which may be accompanied by legislative proposals for the amendment of this Regulation, including changes to the Union list. That review shall also examine the effectiveness of the implementing provisions on invasive alien species of regional concern, the need for and the feasibility of, including species native to the Union in the Union list and whether further harmonisation is needed to increase the effectiveness of the action plans and measures undertaken by the Member States.
4.   The Commission shall, by means of implementing acts, specify the technical formats for reporting in order to simplify and streamline reporting obligations for the Member States in relation to the information pursuant to paragraph 1 of this Article. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 27(2).
