Article 8
Permits
1.   By way of derogation from the restrictions set out in points (a), (b), (c), (d), (f) and (g) of Article 7(1), and subject to paragraph 2 of this Article, Member States shall establish a permit system allowing establishments to carry out research on, or ex-situ conservation of, invasive alien species of Union concern. Where the use of products derived from invasive alien species of Union concern is unavoidable to advance human health, Member States may also include scientific production and subsequent medicinal use within their permit system.
2.   Member States shall empower their competent authorities to issue the permits referred to in paragraph 1 for activities carried out in contained holding that fulfil all of the following conditions:
(a)
the invasive alien species of Union concern is kept in and handled in contained holding in accordance with paragraph 3;
(b)
the activity is to be carried out by appropriately qualified personnel as laid down by the competent authorities;
(c)
transport to and from contained holding is carried out under conditions that exclude escape of the invasive alien species as established by the permit;
(d)
in the case of invasive alien species of Union concern that are animals, they are marked or otherwise effectively identified where appropriate, using methods that do not cause avoidable pain, distress or suffering;
(e)
the risk of escape or spread or removal is effectively managed, taking into account the identity, biology and means of dispersal of the species, the activity and the contained holding envisaged, the interaction with the environment and other relevant factors;
(f)
a continuous surveillance system and a contingency plan covering possible escape or spread is drawn up by the applicant, including an eradication plan. The contingency plan shall be approved by the competent authority. If an escape or spread occurs, the contingency plan shall be implemented immediately and the permit may be withdrawn, temporarily or permanently.
The permit referred to in paragraph 1 shall be limited to a number of invasive alien species and specimens that does not exceed the capacity of the contained holding. It shall include the restrictions necessary to mitigate the risk of escape or spread of the species concerned. It shall accompany the invasive alien species to which it refers at all times when those species are kept, brought into and transported within the Union.
3.   Specimens shall be considered to be kept in contained holding if the following conditions are fulfilled:
(a)
the specimens are physically isolated and they cannot escape or spread or be removed by unauthorised persons from the holdings where they are kept;
(b)
cleaning, waste handling and maintenance protocols ensure that no specimens or reproducible parts can escape, spread or be removed by unauthorised persons;
(c)
the removal of the specimens from the holdings, disposal or destruction or humane cull is done in such way as to exclude propagation or reproduction outside of the holdings.
4.   When applying for a permit, the applicant shall provide all necessary evidence to allow the competent authority to assess whether the conditions set out in paragraphs 2 and 3 are fulfilled.
5.   Member States shall empower their competent authorities to withdraw the permit at any point in time, temporarily or permanently, if unforeseen events with an adverse impact on biodiversity or related ecosystem services occur. Any withdrawal of a permit shall be justified on scientific grounds and, where scientific information is insufficient, on the grounds of the precautionary principle and having due regard to national administrative rules.
6.   The Commission shall adopt, by means of implementing acts, the format of the document serving as evidence for the permit issued by the competent authorities of a Member State. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 27(2). Member States shall use that format for a document accompanying the permit.
7.   For all permits issued in accordance with paragraph 1 of this Article, Member States, shall, without delay, make publicly available on the internet at least the following:
(a)
the scientific and common names of the invasive alien species of Union concern for which the permit has been issued;
(b)
the number or the volume of specimens concerned;
(c)
the purpose for which the permit has been issued; and
(d)
the codes of Combined Nomenclature as provided by Regulation (EEC) No 2658/87.
8.   Member States shall ensure that inspections are carried out by their competent authorities to ensure that the establishments comply with the conditions set out in those permits issued.
