Article 19
Management measures
1.   Within 18 months of an invasive alien species being included on the Union list, Member States shall have in place effective management measures for those invasive alien species of Union concern which the Member States have found to be widely spread on their territory, so that their impact on biodiversity, the related ecosystem services, and, where applicable, on human health or the economy are minimised.
Those management measures shall be proportionate to the impact on the environment and appropriate to the specific circumstances of the Member States, be based on an analysis of costs and benefits and also include, as far as is feasible, the restoration measures referred to in Article 20. They shall be prioritised based on the risk evaluation and their cost effectiveness.
2.   The management measures shall consist of lethal or non-lethal physical, chemical or biological actions aimed at the eradication, population control or containment of a population of an invasive alien species. Where appropriate, management measures shall include actions applied to the receiving ecosystem aimed at increasing its resilience to current and future invasions. The commercial use of already established invasive alien species may be temporarily allowed as part of the management measures aimed at their eradication, population control or containment, under strict justification and provided that all appropriate controls are in place to avoid any further spread.
3.   When applying management measures and selecting methods to be used, Member States shall have due regard to human health and the environment, especially non-targeted species and their habitats, and shall ensure that, when animals are targeted, they are spared any avoidable pain, distress or suffering, without compromising the effectiveness of the management measures.
4.   The surveillance system provided for in Article 14 shall be designed and used to monitor the effectiveness of eradication, population control or containment measures in minimising the impact on biodiversity, the related ecosystems services and, where applicable, on human health or the economy. The monitoring shall also assess the impact on non-targeted species, as appropriate.
5.   Where there is a significant risk that an invasive alien species of Union concern will spread to another Member State, the Member States in which that species is present shall immediately notify the other Member States and the Commission. Where appropriate, the Member States concerned shall establish jointly agreed management measures. Where third countries may also be affected by the spread, the Member State affected shall endeavour to inform the third countries concerned.
