Article 5
Risk assessment
1.   For the purposes of Article 4, a risk assessment shall be carried out in relation to the current and potential range of invasive alien species, having regard to the following elements:
(a)
a description of the species with its taxonomic identity, its history, and its natural and potential range;
(b)
a description of its reproduction and spread patterns and dynamics including an assessment of whether the environmental conditions necessary for its reproduction and spread exist;
(c)
a description of the potential pathways of introduction and spread of the species, both intentional and unintentional, including where relevant the commodities with which the species is generally associated;
(d)
a thorough assessment of the risk of introduction, establishment and spread in relevant biogeographical regions in current conditions and in foreseeable climate change conditions;
(e)
a description of the current distribution of the species, including whether the species is already present in the Union or in neighbouring countries, and a projection of its likely future distribution;
(f)
a description of the adverse impact on biodiversity and related ecosystem services, including on native species, protected sites, endangered habitats, as well as on human health, safety, and the economy including an assessment of the potential future impact having regard to available scientific knowledge;
(g)
an assessment of the potential costs of damage;
(h)
a description of the known uses for the species and social and economic benefits deriving from those uses.
2.   When proposing species for listing as invasive alien species of Union concern, the Commission shall carry out the risk assessment referred to in paragraph 1.
Whenever a Member State submits a request for the inclusion of a species on the Union list it shall be responsible for carrying out the risk assessment referred to in paragraph 1. Where necessary, the Commission may assist the Member States in the development of such risk assessments in so far as it relates to their European dimension.
3.   The Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts, in accordance with Article 29, to further specify the type of evidence acceptable for the purposes of point (b) of Article 4(3) and provide a detailed description of the application of points (a) to (h) of paragraph 1 of this Article. The detailed description shall include the methodology to be applied in the risk assessments, taking into account relevant national and international standards and the need to prioritise action against invasive alien species associated with, or that have the potential to cause, a significant adverse impact on biodiversity or related ecosystem services, as well as on human health or the economy, such adverse impact being considered as an aggravating factor. It is of particular importance that the Commission follow its usual practice and carry out consultations with experts, including Member States' experts, before adopting those delegated acts.
