Article 29
Information
1.   Member States shall prepare and carry out information and awareness-raising campaigns. They shall take the necessary measures to inform the owners and tenants of buildings or building units and all relevant market actors, such as local and regional authorities and energy communities, of the different methods and practices that serve to enhance energy performance. In particular, Member States shall take the necessary measures to provide tailor-made information to vulnerable households. That information shall also be made available to local authorities and civil society organisations.
2.   Member States shall in particular provide information to the owners or tenants of buildings on energy performance certificates, including their purpose and objectives, on cost-effective measures and, where appropriate, financial instruments, to improve the energy performance of the building, and on replacing fossil fuel boilers with more sustainable alternatives. Member States shall provide the information through accessible and transparent advisory tools such as renovation advice and the one-stop shops established pursuant to Article 18, paying particular attention to vulnerable households.
At the request of the Member States, the Commission shall assist Member States in staging information campaigns for the purposes of paragraph 1 and the first subparagraph of this paragraph, which may be dealt with in Union programmes.
3.   Member States shall ensure that guidance and training, including for under-represented groups, are made available, for those responsible for implementing this Directive. Such guidance and training shall address the importance of improving energy performance, and shall enable consideration of the optimal combination of improvements in energy efficiency, reduction of greenhouse gas emissions, use of energy from renewable sources and use of district heating and cooling when planning, designing, building and renovating industrial or residential areas. Such guidance and training may also address structural improvements, adaptation to climate change, fire safety, risks related to intense seismic activity, the removal of hazardous substances including asbestos, air pollutant emissions (including fine particulate matter), indoor environmental quality and accessibility for persons with disabilities. Member States shall endeavour to put in place measures to support training for local and regional authorities, renewable energy communities and other relevant actors, such as citizen-led renovation initiatives, to promote the objectives of this Directive.
4.   The Commission shall continuously improve its information services, in particular the website that has been set up as a European portal for energy efficiency in buildings directed towards citizens, professionals and authorities, in order to assist Member States in their information and awareness-raising efforts. Information displayed on that website might include links to relevant Union law and national, regional and local rules, links to Europa websites that display the National Energy Efficiency Action Plans, links to available financial instruments, as well as best practice examples at national, regional and local level, including with regard to the one-stop shops established pursuant to Article 18 of this Directive. In the context of the European Regional Development Fund, the Cohesion Fund and the Just Transition Fund established by Regulation (EU) 2021/1056 of the European Parliament and of the Council (33), the Social Climate Fund, and the Recovery and Resilience Facility, the Commission shall continue and further intensify its information services with the aim of facilitating the use of available funds by providing assistance and information, including, in cooperation with the European Investment Bank, through the European Local Energy Assistance facility, to interested stakeholders, including national, regional and local authorities, on funding possibilities, taking into account the latest changes in the regulatory framework.
