Article 23
Inspections
1.   Member States shall lay down the necessary measures to establish regular inspections of the accessible parts of heating systems, ventilation systems and air-conditioning systems, including any combination thereof, with an effective rated output of over 70 kW. The effective rating of the system shall be based on the sum of the rated output of the heat generators and cooling generators.
2.   Member States may establish separate inspection schemes for the inspections of residential and non-residential systems.
3.   Member States may set different inspection frequencies depending on the type and effective rated output of the system whilst taking into account the costs of the inspection of the system and the estimated energy cost savings that may result from the inspection. Systems shall be inspected at least every five years. Systems with generators of an effective rated output of more than 290 kW shall be inspected at least every three years.
4.   The inspection shall include the assessment of the generator or generators, circulation pumps and, where appropriate, components of ventilation systems, air and water distribution systems, hydronic balancing systems and control systems. Member States may include in the inspection schemes any additional building systems identified under Annex I.
The inspection shall include an assessment of the efficiency and sizing of the heat and cooling generator or generators and of the main components thereof compared with the requirements of the building and shall consider the capabilities of the system to optimise its performance under typical or average operating conditions, using available energy-saving technologies, and under changing conditions due to use variation. Where relevant, the inspection shall assess the feasibility of the system to operate under different and more efficient temperature settings, such as at low temperature for water-based heating systems, including via the design of thermal power output and temperature and flow requirements, while ensuring the safe operation of the system. The inspection shall, where relevant, include a basic assessment of the feasibility to reduce on-site use of fossil fuels, for example by integrating renewable energy, changing energy source or replace or adjust the existing systems.
Where a ventilation system is installed, its sizing and its capabilities to optimise its performance under typical or average operating conditions relevant for the specific and current use of the building shall also be assessed.
Where no changes have been made to the system or to the requirements of the building following an inspection carried out pursuant to this Article, Member States may choose not to require the assessment of the main component sizing or the assessment of operation under different temperatures to be repeated.
5.   Technical building systems that are explicitly covered by an agreed energy performance criterion or a contractual arrangement specifying an agreed level of energy efficiency improvement, such as energy performance contracting, or that are operated by a utility or network operator and therefore subject to performance monitoring measures on the system side, shall be exempt from the requirements laid down in paragraph 1, provided that the overall impact of such an approach is equivalent to that resulting from paragraph 1.
6.   Where the overall impact is equivalent to that resulting from paragraph 1, Member States may opt to take alternative measures such as financial support or the provision of advice to users concerning the replacement of generators, other modifications to the system and alternative solutions to assess the performance, efficiency and appropriate size of those systems.
Before applying the alternative measures referred to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph, each Member State shall, by means of submitting a report to the Commission, document the equivalence of the impact of those measures to the impact of the measures referred to in paragraph 1, including in terms of energy savings and greenhouse gas emissions.
7.   Buildings that comply with Article 13(10) or (11) shall be exempt from the requirements laid down in paragraph 1 of this Article.
8.   Member States shall put in place inspection schemes or alternative measures such as digital tools and checklists to certify that the delivered construction and renovation works meet the designed energy performance and are compliant with the minimum energy performance requirements laid down in the building codes or equivalent regulations.
9.   Member States shall include a summarised analysis of the inspection schemes and their results as an annex to the national building renovation plan referred to in Article 3. Member States that have chosen the alternative measures indicated in paragraph 6 of this Article shall include a summarised analysis and the results of the alternative measures.
