Article 15
Smart readiness of buildings
1.   The Commission shall adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 32 to supplement this Directive concerning an optional common Union scheme for rating the smart readiness of buildings. The rating shall be based on an assessment of the capabilities of a building or building unit to adapt its operation to the needs of the occupant, in particular concerning indoor environmental quality and the grid and to improve its energy efficiency and overall performance.
In accordance with Annex IV, the optional common Union scheme for rating the smart readiness of buildings shall lay down:
(a)
the definition of the smart readiness indicator;
(b)
a methodology by which it is to be calculated.
2.   By 30 June 2026, the Commission shall submit a report to the European Parliament and the Council on the testing and implementation of the smart readiness indicator on the basis of the available results of the national test phases and other relevant projects.
Taking into account the outcome of that report, the Commission shall, by 30 June 2027, adopt a delegated act in accordance with Article 32, supplementing this Directive by requiring the application of the common Union scheme for rating the smart readiness of buildings, in accordance with Annex IV, to non-residential buildings with an effective rated output for heating systems, air-conditioning systems, systems for combined space heating and ventilation, or systems for combined air-conditioning and ventilation of over 290 kW.
3.   The Commission shall, after having consulted the relevant stakeholders, adopt an implementing act detailing the technical arrangements for the effective implementation of the scheme referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article, including a timeline for a non-committal test phase at national level, and clarifying the complementary relation of the scheme to the energy performance certificates referred to in Article 19.
That implementing act shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 33(3).
4.   Provided that the Commission has adopted the delegated act referred to in paragraph 2, it shall, by 30 June 2027, adopt an implementing act detailing the technical arrangements for the effective implementation of the application of the scheme referred to in paragraph 2 to non-residential buildings with an effective rated output for heating systems, air-conditioning systems, systems for combined space heating and ventilation, or systems for combined air-conditioning and ventilation of over 290 kW.
That implementing act shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 33(3).
