Article 7
New buildings
1.   Member States shall ensure that new buildings are zero-emission buildings in accordance with Article 11:
(a)
from 1 January 2028, new buildings owned by public bodies; and
(b)
from 1 January 2030, all new buildings;
Until the application of the requirements under the first subparagraph, Member States shall ensure that all new buildings are at least nearly zero-energy buildings and meet the minimum energy performance requirements laid down in accordance with Article 5. Where public bodies intend to occupy a new building that they do not own, they shall aim for that building to be a zero-emission building.
2.   Member States shall ensure that the life-cycle GWP is calculated in accordance with Annex III and disclosed in the energy performance certificate of the building:
(a)
from 1 January 2028, for all new buildings with a useful floor area larger than 1 000 m2;
(b)
from 1 January 2030, for all new buildings.
3.   The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 32 to amend Annex III to set out a Union framework for the national calculation of life-cycle GWP with a view to achieving climate neutrality. The first such delegated act shall be adopted by 31 December 2025.
4.   Member States may decide not to apply paragraphs 1 and 2 to buildings for which building permit applications or equivalent applications, including for change of use, have already been submitted by the dates pursuant to paragraphs 1 and 2.
5.   By 1 January 2027, Member States shall publish and notify to the Commission a roadmap detailing the introduction of limit values on the total cumulative life-cycle GWP of all new buildings and set targets for new buildings from 2030, considering a progressive downward trend, as well as maximum limit values, detailed for different climatic zones and building typologies.
Those maximum limit values shall be in line with the Union’s objective of achieving climate neutrality.
The Commission shall issue guidance, share evidence on existing national policies and offer technical support to Member States, at their request.
6.   Member States shall address, in relation to new buildings, the issues of optimal indoor environmental quality, adaptation to climate change, fire safety, risks related to intense seismic activity and accessibility for persons with disabilities. Member States shall also address carbon removals associated to carbon storage in or on buildings.
