Article 11
Zero-emission buildings
1.   A zero-emission building shall not cause any on-site carbon emissions from fossil fuels. A zero-emission building shall, where economically and technically feasible, offer the capacity to react to external signals and adapt its energy use, generation or storage.
2.   Member States shall take the necessary measures to ensure that the energy demand of a zero-emission building complies with a maximum threshold.
Member States shall set that maximum threshold for the energy demand of a zero-emission building with a view to achieving at least the cost-optimal levels established in the most recent national cost-optimal report pursuant to Article 6. Member States shall revise the maximum threshold every time that the cost-optimal levels are revised.
3.   The maximum threshold for the energy demand of a zero-emission building shall be at least 10 % lower than the threshold for total primary energy use established at Member State level for nearly zero-energy buildings on 28 May 2024.
4.   Member States may adjust the maximum threshold for the energy demand of a zero-emission building for renovated buildings, while complying with the respective provisions on cost optimality, and, where thresholds for renovated nearly zero-energy buildings have been established, the requirements of paragraph 3.
5.   Member States shall take the necessary measures to ensure that the operational greenhouse gas emissions of a zero-emission building comply with a maximum threshold established at the Member State level in their national building renovation plans. That maximum threshold may be set at different levels for new and renovated buildings.
6.   Member States shall notify the Commission about their maximum thresholds, including a description of the calculation methodology per building type and relevant outdoor climate designation, in accordance with Annex I. The Commission shall review the maximum thresholds and recommend their adaptation where appropriate.
7.   Member States shall ensure that the total annual primary energy use of a new or renovated zero-emission building is covered by:
(a)
energy from renewable sources generated on-site or nearby, fulfilling the criteria laid down in Article 7 of Directive (EU) 2018/2001;
(b)
energy from renewable sources provided from a renewable energy community within the meaning of Article 22 of Directive (EU) 2018/2001;
(c)
energy from an efficient district heating and cooling system in accordance with Article 26(1) of Directive (EU) 2023/1791; or
(d)
energy from carbon-free sources.
Where it is not technically or economically feasible to fulfil the requirements laid down in this paragraph, the total annual primary energy use may also be covered by other energy from the grid complying with criteria established at national level.
