Article 22
Databases for the energy performance of buildings
1.   Each Member State shall set up a national database for the energy performance of buildings which allows data to be gathered on the energy performance of individual buildings and on the overall energy performance of the national building stock. Such databases may consist of a set of interconnected databases.
The database shall allow data to be gathered from all relevant sources related to energy performance certificates, inspections, the renovation passport, the smart readiness indicator and the calculated or metered energy consumption of the buildings covered. In order to populate the database, building typologies may also be gathered. Data may also be gathered and stored on both operational and embodied emissions and life-cycle GWP.
2.   The aggregated and anonymised data of building stock shall be made publicly available, in compliance with Union and national data protection rules. The data stored shall be machine-readable and accessible via an appropriate digital interface. Member States shall ensure easy and free-of-charge access to the full energy performance certificate for building owners, tenants and managers and to financial institutions as regards the buildings in their investment and lending portfolios, and, upon permission from the owner, also to independent experts. For buildings offered for rent or sale, Member States shall ensure access to the full energy performance certificate for prospective tenants or buyers that have been authorised by the owner of the building.
3.   Member States shall ensure that local authorities have access to relevant data on the energy performance of buildings on their territory as required to facilitate drafting of heating and cooling plans and include operational geographic information systems and the related databases, in accordance with Regulation (EU) 2016/679. Member States shall support the local authorities in obtaining necessary resources for data and information management.
4.   Member States shall make publicly available information on the share of buildings in the national building stock covered by energy performance certificates and aggregated or anonymised data on the energy performance, including the energy consumption, and, where available, the life-cycle GWP of the buildings covered. The public information shall be updated at least twice per year. Member States shall make anonymised or aggregated information available to public and research institutions such as national statistical institutes, upon request.
5.   At least once per year, Member States shall ensure the transfer of the information in the national database to the EU Building Stock Observatory. Member States may transfer the information more frequently.
6.   The Commission shall adopt implementing acts to establish common templates for the transfer of the information to the EU Building Stock Observatory. The first such implementing act shall be adopted by 30 June 2025.
Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 33(3).
7.   For the purpose of ensuring coherence and consistency of information, Member States shall ensure that the national database for the energy performance of buildings is interoperable and integrated with other administrative databases containing information on buildings, such as the national building cadastre or land registry and digital building logbooks.
