Article 10
Solar energy in buildings
1.   Member States shall ensure that all new buildings are designed to optimise their solar energy generation potential on the basis of the solar irradiance of the site, enabling the subsequent cost-effective installation of solar technologies.
2.   The permit-granting procedure for the installation of solar energy equipment set out in Article 16d of Directive (EU) 2018/2001, and simple-notification procedure for grid connections set out in Article 17 of that Directive shall apply to the installation of solar energy equipment on buildings.
3.   Member States shall ensure the deployment of suitable solar energy installations, if technically suitable and economically and functionally feasible, as follows:
(a)
by 31 December 2026, on all new public and non-residential buildings with useful floor area larger than 250 m2;
(b)
on all existing public buildings with useful floor area larger than:
(i)
2 000 m2, by 31 December 2027;
(ii)
750 m2, by 31 December 2028;
(iii)
250 m2, by 31 December 2030;
(c)
by 31 December 2027, on existing non-residential buildings with useful floor area larger than 500 m2, where the building undergoes a major renovation or an action that requires an administrative permit for building renovations, works on the roof or the installation of a technical building system;
(d)
by 31 December 2029, on all new residential buildings; and
(e)
by 31 December 2029, on all new roofed car parks physically adjacent to buildings.
In their national building renovation plans referred to in Article 3, Member States shall include policies and measures with regard to the deployment of suitable solar energy installations on all buildings.
4.   Member States shall establish, and make publicly available, criteria at national level for the practical implementation of the obligations set out in this Article, and for possible exemptions from those obligations for specific types of building, taking into account the principle of technological neutrality with regard to technologies not producing any on-site emissions and in accordance with the assessed technical and economic potential of the solar energy installations and the characteristics of the buildings covered by this obligation. Member States shall also take into account structural integrity, green roofs, and attic and roof insulation, where appropriate.
In order to achieve the objectives of this Article and to take into account the issues linked to the stability of the electricity network, Member States shall include relevant stakeholders in the establishment of the criteria referred to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph.
In the transposition of the obligations set out in the first subparagraph of paragraph 3, a Member State may use the measurement of buildings’ ground floor area instead of buildings’ useful floor area, provided that the Member State shows that this results in an equivalent amount of installed capacity of suitable solar energy installations on buildings.
5.   Member States shall put in place a framework providing the necessary administrative, technical and financial measures to support the deployment of solar energy in buildings, including in combination with technical building systems or efficient district heating systems.
