Article 19
International relations
In so far as is necessary to achieve the objectives set out in this Regulation and without prejudice to the respective competences of the Member States and of the Union institutions and bodies, including the European External Action Service, the Agency may develop contacts and enter into administrative arrangements with supervisory authorities, international organisations and the administrations of third countries in particular with those impacting the Union energy wholesale market in order to promote the harmonisation of the regulatory framework. Those arrangements shall not create legal obligations in respect of the Union and its Member States, nor shall they prevent Member States and their competent authorities from concluding bilateral or multilateral arrangements with those supervisory authorities, international organisations and the administrations of third countries. Those arrangements may concern aspects of common interest, such as methodologies of data collection, analysis and assessment of data or other information, and other areas of expertise.’
(23)
Article 20 is amended as follows:
(a)
paragraphs 2 and 3 are replaced by the following:
‘2.   The power to adopt delegated acts referred to in Article 6(1), points (a) and (b), shall be conferred on the Commission for a period of five years from 28 December 2011. The power to adopt delegated acts referred to in Article 4a(8), Article 6(1), point (c), and Article 9a(6) shall be conferred on the Commission for a period of five years from 7 May 2024.
The Commission shall draw up a report in respect of the delegation of power not later than nine months before the end of the five year period.
The delegation of power shall be tacitly extended for periods of an identical duration, unless the European Parliament or the Council opposes such extension not later than three months before the end of each period.
3.   The delegation of power referred to in Article 4a(8), Article 6(1) and Article 9a(6) may be revoked at any time by the European Parliament or by the Council. A decision to revoke shall put an end to the delegation of the power specified in that decision. It shall take effect the day following the publication of the decision in the Official Journal of the European Union or at a later date specified therein. It shall not affect the validity of any delegated acts already in force.’
(b)
paragraph 5 is replaced by the following:
‘5.   A delegated act adopted pursuant to Article 4a(8), Article 6(1) or Article 9a(6) shall enter into force only if no objection has been expressed either by the European Parliament or the Council within a period of two months of notification of that act to the European Parliament and to the Council or if, before the expiry of that period, the European Parliament and the Council have both informed the Commission that they will not object. That period shall be extended by two months at the initiative of the European Parliament or of the Council.’
(24)
the following article is inserted:
‘Article 21a
Report and review
1.   By 1 June 2027, and every five years thereafter, the Commission shall, after consulting relevant stakeholders, assess the application of this Regulation, in particular as regards its impact on market behaviour, market participants, liquidity, reporting requirements, including on LNG market data, and the level of administrative burden for market participants, including the potential barriers to entry for new market participants, as well as the Agency’s performance in relation to its objectives, mandate and tasks. On the basis of those assessments, the Commission shall draw up a report and submit it without undue delay to the European Parliament and to the Council. Those reports shall be accompanied, where appropriate, by legislative proposals.
2.   By 1 June 2025 the Commission shall assess the effectiveness of introducing criminal penalties by Member States for intentional and serious cases of market abuse on the Union wholesale energy markets and shall submit a report to the European Parliament and to the Council. The report may propose appropriate measures that may include the submission of a legislative proposal.’.
