Article 10
Emission type-approval, conformity of production, in-service conformity and market surveillance
1.   Approval authorities shall put in place measures to grant emission type-approvals to vehicle types, systems, components and separate technical units and to perform tests, checks and inspections for verifying whether the manufacturers comply with the requirements for conformity of production and in-service conformity in accordance with Annex V.
2.   Market surveillance authorities shall perform market surveillance checks in accordance with Article 8 of Regulation (EU) 2018/858 and Tables 2, 4, 6, 8, 10 and 12 of Annex V to this Regulation.
3.   With effect from the adoption of all the implementing acts referred to in Article 14 (8), where a manufacturer so requests, the approval authorities shall not refuse to grant EU emission type-approval or national emission type-approval for a new type of vehicle of category M1 or N1, or prohibit the registration, sale or entry into service of such a new vehicle complying with this Regulation.
With effect from the adoption of all the implementing acts referred to in Article 14 (9), where a manufacturer so requests, the approval authorities shall not refuse to grant EU emission type-approval or national emission type-approval for a new type of vehicle of category M2, M3, N2 or N3 or engine intended for such vehicles, or prohibit the registration, sale or entry into service of such a new vehicle or engine complying with this Regulation.
4.   With effect from 29 November 2026, approval authorities shall, in the case of new types of vehicles of category M1 or N1 which do not comply with this Regulation, refuse to grant EU emission type-approval or national emission type-approval to such new types of vehicles on grounds relating to CO2 and pollutant emissions, fuel and electric energy consumption or battery durability.
5.   With effect from 29 November 2027, national authorities shall, in the case of new vehicles of category M1 or N1 which do not comply with this Regulation, consider certificates of conformity to no longer be valid for the purposes of registration and shall prohibit the registration, sale or entry into service of such new vehicles on grounds relating to CO2 and pollutant emissions, fuel and electric energy consumption or battery durability.
6.   With effect from 29 May 2028, approval authorities shall, in the case of new types of vehicles of category M2, M3, N2 or N3 and new types of trailers of category O3 or O4 which do not comply with this Regulation, refuse to grant EU emission type-approval or national emission type-approval to such new types of vehicles and trailers on grounds relating to CO2 and pollutant emissions, fuel and electric energy consumption or battery durability.
7.   With effect from 29 May 2029, national authorities shall, in the case of new vehicles of category M2, M3, N2 or N3 and new trailers of category O3 or O4, which do not comply with this Regulation, consider certificates of conformity to be no longer valid for the purposes of registration and shall prohibit the registration, sale or entry into service of such new vehicles and trailers on grounds relating to CO2 and pollutant emissions, fuel and electric energy consumption, energy efficiency or battery durability.
8.   By way of derogation from paragraph 7 of this Article, until 31 December 2029, national authorities shall allow for vehicles of category M2 or M3, for which there is a 100 % zero-emission target as from the reporting period of the year 2030 in accordance with Regulation (EU) 2019/1242, the registration, sale or entry into service of new vehicles, which do not comply with this Regulation but have a valid emission type-approval in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 595/2009.
9.   With effect from 1 July 2030, national authorities shall, in the case of new vehicles of category M1 or N1 constructed by small-volume manufacturers which do not comply with this Regulation, consider certificates of conformity to be no longer valid for the purposes of registration and shall prohibit the registration, sale or entry into service of such new vehicles on grounds relating to CO2 and pollutant emissions, fuel and electric energy consumption, energy efficiency or battery durability.
10.   With effect from 1 July 2031, national authorities shall, in the case of new vehicles of category M2, M3, N2 or N3 constructed by small-volume manufacturers, which do not comply with this Regulation, consider certificates of conformity to be no longer valid for the purposes of registration and shall prohibit the registration, sale or entry into service of such new vehicles on grounds relating to CO2 and pollutant emissions, fuel and electric energy consumption, energy efficiency or battery durability.
