Article 11
Specific obligations of Member States concerning the emission type approval of systems, components and separate technical units
1.   With effect from 29 November 2026, Member States shall prohibit the sale or installation of a system, component or separate technical unit intended to be fitted on a vehicle of category M1 or N1 approved under this Regulation, where the system, component or separate technical unit is not type-approved in accordance with this Regulation.
2.   With effect from 29 May 2028, Member States shall prohibit the sale or installation of a system, component or separate technical unit intended to be fitted on a vehicle of category M2, M3, N2 or N3, or on a trailer of category O3 or O4 approved under this Regulation, where the system, component or separate technical unit is not type-approved in accordance with this Regulation.
3.   Approval authorities may continue to grant extensions to EU emission type-approvals of replacement pollution control systems under the terms which applied at the time of the original emission type approval. National authorities shall prohibit the sale or installation on a vehicle of such replacement pollution control systems unless they are type-approved.
4.   With effect from 1 July 2028, national authorities shall grant component or separate technical unit EU type-approval only in respect of new types of C1 class tyres which comply with this Regulation.
With effect from 1 July 2030, national authorities shall prohibit the placing on the market of C1 class tyres which do not comply with this Regulation and shall prohibit the registration of new vehicles equipped with C1 class tyres where those tyres do not comply with this Regulation.
C1 class tyres which do not comply with this Regulation may continue to be made available on the market until 30 June 2032.
5.   With effect from 1 April 2030, national authorities shall grant component or separate technical unit EU type-approval only in respect of new types of C2 class tyres which comply with this Regulation.
With effect from 1 April 2032, national authorities shall prohibit the placing on the market of C2 class tyres which do not comply with this Regulation and shall prohibit the registration of new vehicles equipped with C2 class tyres where those tyres do not comply with this Regulation.
C2 class tyres which do not comply with this Regulation may continue to be made available on the market until 31 March 2034.
6.   With effect from 1 April 2032, national authorities shall grant component or separate technical unit EU type-approval only in respect of new types of C3 class tyres which comply with this Regulation.
With effect from 1 April 2034, national authorities shall prohibit the placing on the market of C3 class tyres which do not comply with this Regulation and shall prohibit the registration of new vehicles equipped with C3 class tyres where those tyres do not comply with this Regulation.
C3 class tyres which do not comply with this Regulation may continue to be made available on the market until 31 March 2036.
