Article 5
Amendments to EC type-approvals
1. The Member State which has granted EC type-approval shall take the necessary measures to ensure that it is informed of any change in the particulars appearing in the information package.
2. An application for amendment of an EC type-approval shall be submitted exclusively to the Member State which granted the initial EC type-approval.
3. If, in the case of EC type-approval, any particulars appearing in the information package have changed, the EC type-approval authority in the Member State which granted the initial EC type-approval shall issue revised pages of the information package as necessary, marking each revised page to show clearly the nature of the change and the date of re-issue.
A consolidated, updated version of the information package, accompanied by a detailed description of the amendment, shall also be considered to meet this requirement.
4. Each time amended pages or a consolidated, updated version are issued, the index to the information package attached to the EC type-approval certificate shall also be amended to show the most recent dates of amendment, or the date of the consolidated, updated version.
5. The amendment shall be considered to be an "extension" and the type-approval authority in the Member State which granted the initial EC type-approval shall issue a revised EC type-approval certificate bearing an extension number that clearly states the reason for the extension and its date of re-issue in the following cases:
(a) if further inspections are required;
(b) if any information in the EC type-approval certificate, with the exception of its attachments, has changed;
(c) if the requirements of a separate directive which applied on the date from which first entry into service is prohibited have changed since the date which currently appears in the vehicle EC type-approval certificate.
6. If the EC type-approval authority in the Member State which granted the initial EC type-approval finds that an amendment to an information package warrants further inspections or fresh tests or checks, it shall inform the manufacturer accordingly and shall issue the documents referred to in paragraphs 3, 4 and 5 only after carrying out tests or checks which have produced satisfactory results.

