Article 4
The EC type-approval process
1. Each Member State shall grant:
(a) the EC type-approval to the vehicle types which conform to the particulars in the information folder and which, according to their category, meet the technical requirements of all the separate directives set out in Annex II, Chapter B;
(b) the multi-stage EC type-approval to incomplete or completed base vehicles which conform to the particulars in the information folder and which meet the technical requirements of all the separate directives set out in Annex II, Chapter B;
(c) system, component or separate technical unit EC type-approval to all types of systems, components or separate technical units which conform to the particulars in the information folder and which meet the technical requirements contained in the corresponding separate directive listed in Annex II, Chapter B.
Where the system, component or separate technical unit to be approved fulfils its function or offers a specific feature only in conjunction with other parts of the vehicle, and where, for this reason, compliance with one or more requirements can be verified only when the system, component or separate technical unit to be approved operates in conjunction with other vehicle parts, whether real or simulated, the scope of the EC type-approval of the system, component or separate technical unit must be restricted accordingly.
In this case, the EC type-approval certificate for such a system, component or separate technical unit shall indicate any restrictions on its use and any conditions for fitting it. Observance of these restrictions and conditions shall be verified at the time of EC type-approval of the vehicle.
2. If a Member State finds that a vehicle, system, component or separate technical unit which complies with the provisions of paragraph 1 is nevertheless a serious risk to road safety, the environment or occupational safety, it may refuse to grant EC type-approval. It shall forthwith notify the other Member States and the Commission thereof, stating the reasons on which its decision is based.
3. For each vehicle type in respect of which they have granted, refused to grant or withdrawn EC type-approval, the approval authority in each Member State shall send a copy of the EC type-approval certificate accompanied by the attachments specified in Chapter C of Annex II to the type-approval authorities in the other Member States within one month.
4. Each month, the EC type-approval authority in each Member State shall send a list containing the particulars shown in Annex VI of the EC type-approvals for systems, components or separate technical units which it has granted, refused to grant or withdrawn during the month in question to the EC type-approval authorities in the other Member States.
These authorities, on receiving an application from the EC type-approval authority in another Member State, shall immediately send it a copy of the EC type-approval certificate for the system, component or separate technical unit in question and/or an information package for each type of system, component or separate technical unit in respect of which it has issued, refused to issue or withdrawn EC type-approval.

