Whereas:
(1) In connection with the harmonisation of approval procedures, it has become essential to bring the provisions of Council Directive 74/150/EEC of 4 March 1974 on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the type-approval of wheeled agricultural or forestry tractors(4) into line with those of Council Directive 70/156/EEC of 6 February 1970 on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the type-approval of motor vehicles and their trailers(5) and those of Council Directive 92/61/EEC of 30 June 1992 relating to the type-approval of two- or three-wheel motor vehicles(6).
(2) Directive 74/150/EEC currently limits the scope of the Community type-approval procedure to wheeled agricultural or forestry tractors. It is therefore also essential to extend its scope to other categories of agricultural or forestry vehicles. This Directive is therefore a first step towards the regulation of other agricultural motorised vehicles.
(3) Account should also be taken of the fact that an exemption procedure should be introduced for certain vehicles built in limited numbers, end-of-series vehicles, or those which take advantage of technical progress not covered by a separate directive.
(4) This Directive being based on the principle of total harmonisation, the period before EC type-approval becomes compulsory should be long enough to allow the manufacturers of those vehicles to adjust to the new harmonised procedures.
(5) As a result of Council Decision 97/836/EC of 27 November 1997 with a view to accession by the European Community to the Agreement of the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe concerning the adoption of uniform technical prescriptions for wheeled vehicles, equipment and parts which can be fitted to and/or be used on wheeled vehicles and the conditions for reciprocal recognition of approvals granted on the basis of these prescriptions (Revised 1958 Agreement)(7), the various international regulations to which the Community has acceded must be complied with. Also, certain tests should be harmonised with those defined by the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) codes.
(6) The measures necessary for the implementation of this Directive should be adopted in accordance with Council Decision 1999/468/EC of 28 June 1999 laying down the procedures for the exercise of implementing powers conferred on the Commission(8).
(7) This Directive respects the fundamental rights and observes the principles recognised in particular by the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union as general principles of Community law.
(8) Directive 74/150/EEC has been variously and substantially amended, and should therefore be recast in the interests of clarity and rationality,
HAVE ADOPTED THIS DIRECTIVE:

