Article 3
Definitions
For the purpose of this Regulation:
1.
‘C1, C2 and C3 tyres’ means the tyre classes defined in Article 8 of Regulation (EC) No 661/2009;
2.
‘T-type temporary-use spare tyre’ means a temporary-use spare tyre designed for use at inflation pressures higher than those established for standard and reinforced tyres;
3.
‘point of sale’ means a location where tyres are displayed or stored and offered for sale to end-users, including car show rooms in relation to tyres offered for sale to end-users which are not fitted on the vehicles;
4.
‘technical promotional material’ means technical manuals, brochures, leaflets and catalogues (whether these appear in printed, electronic or online form), as well as websites, the purpose of which is to market tyres to end-users or distributors and that describe the specific technical parameters of a tyre;
5.
‘technical documentation’ means information relating to tyres, including the manufacturer and brand of the tyre; description of the tyre type or the grouping of tyres determined for the declaration of the fuel efficiency class, wet grip class and external rolling noise class and measured value; test reports and testing accuracy;
6.
‘manufacturer’ means any natural or legal person who manufactures a product, or has a product designed or manufactured and markets that product under his name or trademark;
7.
‘importer’ means any natural or legal person established within the Community who places a product from a third country on the Community market;
8.
‘authorised representative’ means any natural or legal person established within the Community who has received a written mandate from a manufacturer to act on his behalf in relation to specified tasks with regard to the latter's obligations under this Regulation;
9.
‘supplier’ means the manufacturer or its authorised representative in the Community or the importer;
10.
‘distributor’ means any natural or legal person in the supply chain, other than the supplier or the importer, who makes a tyre available on the market;
11.
‘making available on the market’ means any supply of a product for distribution or use on the Community market in the course of a commercial activity, whether in return for payment or free of charge;
12.
‘end-user’ means a consumer, as well as a fleet manager or road transport undertaking, that buys or is expected to buy a tyre;
13.
‘essential parameter’ means a tyre parameter such as rolling resistance, wet grip or external rolling noise that has a notable impact on the environment, road safety or health during use.
