Article 4
General obligations and technical requirements
1.   Manufacturers shall demonstrate that all new vehicles that are placed on the market, registered or entered into service, and all new systems, components and separate technical units that are placed on the market or entered into service, are type-approved in accordance with the requirements of this Regulation and of the delegated acts and implementing acts adopted pursuant to it.
2.   Type-approval in accordance with the UN Regulations listed in Annex I shall be considered as EU type-approval in accordance with the requirements of this Regulation and of the delegated acts and implementing acts adopted pursuant to it.
3.   The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 12 to amend Annex I in order to take account of technical progress and regulatory developments by introducing and updating references to the UN Regulations, and relevant series of amendments, that apply on a compulsory basis.
4.   Manufacturers shall ensure that vehicles are designed, constructed and assembled so as to minimise the risk of injury to vehicle occupants and vulnerable road users.
5.   Manufacturers shall also ensure that vehicles, systems, components and separate technical units comply with the applicable requirements listed in Annex II with effect from the dates specified in that Annex, with the detailed technical requirements and test procedures laid down in the delegated acts and with the uniform procedures and technical specifications laid down in the implementing acts adopted pursuant to this Regulation, including the requirements relating to:
(a)
restraint systems, crash testing, fuel system integrity and high voltage electrical safety;
(b)
vulnerable road users, vision and visibility;
(c)
vehicle chassis, braking, tyres and steering;
(d)
on-board instruments, electrical system, vehicle lighting and protection against unauthorised use including cyberattacks;
(e)
driver and system behaviour; and
(f)
general vehicle construction and features.
6.   The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 12 to amend Annex II in order to take account of technical progress and regulatory developments, in particular in relation to the matters listed in points (a) to (f) of paragraph 5 of this Article as well as those referred to in points (a) to (g) of Article 6(1), Article 7(2), (3), (4) and (5), Article 9(2), (3) and (5) and Article 11(1), and with a view to ensuring a high level of general safety of vehicles, systems, components and separate technical units and a high level of protection of vehicle occupants and vulnerable road users, by introducing and updating references to UN Regulations, as well as to delegated acts and implementing acts.
7.   The Commission shall by means of implementing acts adopt provisions concerning uniform procedures and technical specifications for the type-approval of vehicles, systems, components and separate technical units with regard to the requirements listed in Annex II.
Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 13(2). They shall be published at least 15 months before the applicable dates specified in Annex II.
