Article 7
Specific requirements relating to passenger cars and light commercial vehicles
1.   In addition to the other requirements of this Regulation and of the delegated acts and implementing acts adopted pursuant to it that are also applicable to vehicles of categories M1 and N1, vehicles of those categories shall meet the requirements set out in paragraphs 2 to 5 and the technical specifications set out in the implementing acts referred to in paragraph 6.
2.   Vehicles of categories M1 and N1 shall be equipped with advanced emergency braking systems designed and fitted in two phases and providing for:
(a)
the detection of obstacles and moving vehicles ahead of the motor vehicle in the first phase;
(b)
extending the detection capability referred to in point (a) to also include pedestrians and cyclists ahead of the motor vehicle in the second phase.
3.   Vehicles of categories M1 and N1 shall also be equipped with an emergency lane-keeping system.
4.   Advanced emergency braking systems and emergency lane-keeping systems shall meet the following requirements in particular:
(a)
it shall only be possible to switch off such systems one at a time by a sequence of actions to be carried out by the driver;
(b)
the systems shall be in normal operation mode upon each activation of the vehicle master control switch;
(c)
it shall be possible to easily suppress audible warnings, but such action shall not at the same time suppress system functions other than audible warnings;
(d)
it shall be possible for the driver to override such systems.
5.   Vehicles of categories M1 and N1 shall be designed and constructed to provide for an enlarged head impact protection zone with the aim of enhancing the protection of vulnerable road users and mitigating their potential injuries in the event of a collision.
6.   The Commission shall by means of implementing acts adopt provisions concerning uniform procedures and technical specifications for the type-approval of vehicles with regard to the requirements laid down in paragraphs 2 to 5 of this Article.
Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 13(2). They shall be published at least 15 months before the applicable dates specified in Annex II.
