Article 9
Specific requirements relating to buses and trucks
1.   In addition to the other requirements of this Regulation and of the delegated acts and implementing acts adopted pursuant to it that are also applicable to vehicles of categories M2, M3, N2 and N3, vehicles of those categories shall meet the requirements laid down in paragraphs 2 to 5 and the technical specifications set out in the implementing acts referred to in paragraph 7. Vehicles of categories M2 and M3, shall also meet the requirement laid down in paragraph 6.
2.   Vehicles of categories M2, M3, N2 and N3 shall be equipped with a lane departure warning system and an advanced emergency braking system, both of which shall comply with the the technical specifications set out in the implementing acts referred to in paragraph 7.
3.   Vehicles of categories M2, M3, N2 and N3 shall be equipped with advanced systems that are capable of detecting pedestrians and cyclists located in close proximity to the front or nearside of the vehicle and of providing a warning or avoiding collision with such vulnerable road users.
4.   With respect of systems referred to in paragraphs 2 and 3, they shall meet the following requirements in particular:
(a)
it shall only be possible to switch off such systems one at a time by a sequence of actions to be carried out by the driver;
(b)
the systems shall be in normal operation mode upon each activation of the vehicle master control switch;
(c)
it shall be possible to easily suppress audible warnings, but such action shall not at the same time suppress system functions other than audible warnings;
(d)
it shall be possible for the driver to override such systems.
5.   Vehicles of categories M2, M3, N2 and N3 shall be designed and constructed to enhance the direct visibility of vulnerable road users from the driver seat, by reducing to the greatest possible extent the blind spots in front of and to the side of the driver, while taking into account the specificities of different categories of vehicles.
6.   Vehicles of categories M2 and M3 with a capacity exceeding 22 passengers in addition to the driver and constructed with areas for standing passengers to allow frequent passenger movement shall be designed and constructed to be accessible by persons with reduced mobility, including wheelchair users.
7.   The Commission shall by means of implementing acts adopt provisions concerning uniform procedures and technical specifications for:
(a)
the type-approval of vehicles with regard to the requirements laid down in paragraphs 2 to 5 of this Article;
(b)
the type-approval of the systems referred to in paragraph 3 of this Article as separate technical units.
Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 13(2).
Where those implementing acts concern the requirements laid down in paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 of this Article, they shall be published at least 15 months before the applicable dates specified in Annex II.
Where those implementing acts concern the requirements laid down in paragraph 5 of this Article, they shall be published at least 36 months before the applicable dates specified in Annex II.
