Article 56
Scientific information for red coral
1.   In addition to the provisions related to red coral contained in the DCRF manual, Member States shall report the data listed below at the bank, GFCM statistical rectangle and national level, when available:
(a)
number of red coral fishing authorisations granted for fishers and for authorised vessels;
(b)
number of dives per authorised fisher and fishing trip;
(c)
number of authorised fishers on board for each fishing trip; and
(d)
diameter of each colony harvested, if possible.
Such data shall be reported by the Member States to the Commission by 10 June of each year and the Commission shall transmit those data to the GFCM Secretariat by 30 June of each year.
2.   The Member States whose authorised fishers or vessels target red corals shall ensure that a mechanism for adequate scientific monitoring of harvests is in place, with a view to allowing the SAC to provide descriptive information and advice, including on:
(a)
the deployed fishing effort (e.g. number of fishing trips or dive time per week, per month or per year) and overall catch levels by stocks at the bank, GFCM statistical rectangle, national or supranational level;
(b)
the conservation and management reference points with a view to further improving the regional management plan in line with the objective of maximum sustainable yield and low risk of stock collapse;
(c)
the biological and socioeconomic effects of alternative management scenarios, including input/output control or technical measures;
(d)
possible additional spatial or temporal closures in order to preserve fishery sustainability.
3.   It shall be prohibited to commercialise red coral colonies harvested within the framework of research programmes on red coral.
4.   Member States may deploy national scientific observers on the vessels that have harvested red coral. In case of such deployment, Member States may report the information collected to the Commission and the Commission shall transmit that information to the GFCM Secretariat.

Section I



Strait of Sicily


