Article 91
Measures to prevent, deter and eliminate IUU fishing in turbot fisheries
1.   By 20 January of each year, each Member State shall send to the Commission, through the accustomed data-processing support, a list of the vessels using bottom-set gillnets authorised to fish turbot in the Black Sea (GSA 29, as provided for in Annex I). By 31 January of each year, the Commission shall send that list to the GFCM Secretariat.
2.   The list indicated in paragraph 1 shall include, in addition to the data set out in Annex I to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2017/218, the following data:
(a)
GFCM registration number;
(b)
previous name (if any);
(c)
previous flag (if any);
(d)
previous details of deletion from other registers (if any);
(e)
main target species;
(f)
main gear used for turbot, fleet segment and operational unit as defined in the Task 1 statistical matrix set out in section C of Annex III;
(g)
time period authorised for fishing with gillnet or any other gear likely to fish turbot (if any of such authorisation).
3.   Upon request by the GFCM, Member States shall report information on the fishing vessels authorised to engage in a fishing activity in a given period. In particular, Member States shall report the names of the fishing vessels concerned, their external identification number and the fishing opportunities allocated to each of them.
4.   Unmarked abandoned gillnets used in turbot fisheries and found at sea shall be collected by the competent authorities of the coastal Member State. Subsequently, those nets shall either be seized until the owner is duly identified or destroyed if the owner cannot be identified.
5.   Each Member State concerned shall designate landing points, in which landings and transhipping of turbot caught in the Black Sea shall take place, in accordance with Article 43(5) of Regulation (EC) No 1224/2009. A list of such designated landing points shall be communicated to the GFCM Secretariat and the Commission not later than 30 November of each year.
6.   It shall be prohibited to land or tranship from fishing vessels any quantity of turbot caught in the Black Sea at any other place than the designated landing points referred to in paragraph 5.
