Article 116
Authorised vessels in the Jabuka/Pomo Pit area
1.   Without prejudice to Article 115(2) and (3), commercial fishing activities carried out with bottom set nets, bottom trawl nets, set longlines and traps shall only be allowed, in the areas referred to in those paragraphs, if the vessel is in possession of a specific authorisation and if it can demonstrate that it has historically carried out fishing activities in the areas concerned.
2.   In the area referred to in Article 115(2), authorised fishing vessels shall not be entitled to fish for more than two fishing days per week. Authorised fishing vessels using otter twin trawl gear shall not be entitled to fish for more than one fishing day per week.
3.   In the area referred to in Article 115(3), authorised vessels fishing with bottom trawl nets shall be entitled to fish only on Saturdays and Sundays between 05:00 and 22:00. Authorised vessels fishing with bottom set nets, set longlines and traps shall be allowed to fish only between Mondays at 05:00 and Thursdays at 22:00.
4.   The vessels authorised to fish in the area referred to in Article 115(2) and (3) with the gear referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article shall be issued with a fishing authorisation by their Member State in accordance with Article 7 of Regulation (EC) No 1224/2009.
5.   Member States shall send to the Commission, not later than 31 March of each year, the list of vessels for which they issued the authorisation referred to in paragraph 1. The Commission shall communicate to the GFCM Secretariat, not later than 30 April of each year the list of authorised vessels established for the forthcoming year. For each vessel, the list shall contain the information referred to in Annex VIII.
6.   Authorised fishing vessels shall only land catches of demersal stocks in designated landing points. To that end, each Member State concerned shall designate landing points in which landings of catches from the Fisheries Restricted Area of Jabuka/Pomo Pit are authorised. The list of those designated landing points shall be communicated to the Commission by 10 April of each year. The Commission shall transmit that list to the GFCM Secretariat by 30 April of each year.
7.   Fishing vessels authorised to fish in the areas referred to in Article 115(2) and (3) with the gear referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article shall have VMS and/or Automatic Identification System (AIS) working correctly, and the fishing gear on board or in use shall be duly identified, numbered and marked before starting any fishing operation or navigating in those areas.
8.   Fishing vessels equipped with bottom set nets, bottom trawl nets, set longlines and traps without authorisations shall be allowed to transit through the Fisheries Restricted Area only if they follow a direct course at a constant speed of not less than 7 knots and with VMS and/or AIS active on board, and if they do not carry out fishing activities of any kind.
Subsection 4

Deep-sea sensitive habitats

