Article 74
Management of fishing capacity
1.   For the purposes of this Article, the reference fishing capacity for small pelagic stocks is that established on the basis of the lists of fishing vessels of the Member States concerned. Those lists include all fishing vessels equipped with trawl nets, purse seines or other types of surrounding nets without purse line, actively fishing under the scope of this section in 2014.
2.   Fishing vessels equipped with trawl nets and purse seines, irrespective of the LOA of the vessel concerned, are classified as fishing actively for small pelagic stocks when sardine and anchovy account for at least 50 % of the catch in live weight.
3.   Member States shall ensure that the overall fleet capacity of fishing vessels equipped with trawl nets or purse seines actively fishing within the scope of this section, as recorded in the national fleet register and the CFR, does not at any time exceed the reference fishing capacity as provided for in Table B of Annex XII.
4.   Paragraph 3 shall not apply to the national fleets of less than ten purse seiners or pelagic trawlers actively fishing for small pelagic stocks. In such cases, the capacity of active fleets may increase by no more than 50 % in number of vessels and in terms of GT and kW.
5.   Member States shall ensure that fishing vessels equipped with trawl nets and purse seines for small pelagic stocks as referred to in paragraph 2 do not operate for more than 20 fishing days per month and more than 180 fishing days per year.
6.   Any fishing vessel not included in the list of authorised fishing vessels referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article shall not be allowed to fish for, or, by way of derogation from Article 15(1) of Regulation (EU) No 1380/2013, retain on board or land any quantity greater than 20 % of anchovy or sardine or of both anchovy and sardine if the fishing vessel is engaged on a fishing trip in GSAs 17 and/or 18.
7.   Member States shall communicate to the Commission any addition to, any deletion from or any modification of, the list of authorised fishing vessels referred to in paragraph 1 as soon as such addition, deletion or modification occurs. Those changes shall be without prejudice to the reference fishing capacity referred to in paragraph 1. The Commission shall forward that information to the GFCM Secretariat by 31 January of each year.
