Article 9
Programming and allocation of funds for cross-border cooperation
1.   A programming document shall be prepared for the purpose of defining the following:
(a)
the strategic objectives to be pursued by cross-border cooperation, and the priorities and expected results of that cooperation;
(b)
the list of joint operational programmes to be established;
(c)
the indicative breakdown of resources between land and maritime border programmes referred to in points (a) and (b) of Article 8(1) and sea basin programmes referred to in point (c) of Article 8(1);
(d)
the indicative multi-annual allocations to each joint operational programme;
(e)
the territorial units eligible to participate in each joint operational programme, and the territorial units and centres indicated in Article 8(2), (3) and (4);
(f)
the indicative allocation to support, as appropriate, horizontal capacity-building actions, networking and exchange of experiences among programmes;
(g)
the contributions to the transnational programmes established under Regulation (EU) No 1299/2013 of the European Parliament and the Council (12) in which partner countries and/or the Russian Federation participate.
The programming document shall cover a period of seven years and shall be adopted by the Commission in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 16(3) of Regulation (EU) No 236/2014. It shall be reviewed at mid-term or whenever necessary and may be revised in accordance with that procedure.
2.   Joint operational programmes shall be co-financed by the ERDF. The overall amount of the contribution from the ERDF shall be determined pursuant to Article 4(4) of Regulation (EU) No 1299/2013. This Regulation shall apply to the use of that contribution.
3.   The Instrument for Pre-Accession (IPA II), as established by Regulation (EU) No 236/2014, may be used to co-finance joint operational programmes in which beneficiaries listed in Annex I to that Regulation participate. This Regulation shall apply to the use of that co-financing.
4.   The indicative allocations of funds to joint operational programmes shall be based on objective criteria, in particular the population of the eligible territorial units as defined in points (a), (b) and (c) of Article 8(1). In the determination of the indicative allocations, adjustments may be made to reflect the need for a balance between the contributions from the ERDF and the contributions provided under this Regulation, as well as other factors affecting the intensity of cooperation, such as the specific characteristics of border areas and their capacity to manage and absorb Union support.
