Article 11
Management of joint operational programmes
1.   Joint operational programmes shall usually be implemented in shared management with Member States. However, participating countries may propose implementation in indirect management, by an entity listed in Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012 and in accordance with the implementing rules referred to in Article 12(2) of this Regulation.
2.   The Commission shall satisfy itself on the basis of available information that the Member State in the case of shared management, or the other cross-border cooperation participating country or the international organisation in the case of indirect management, has set up, and operates, management and control systems that comply with Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012, with this Regulation and with its implementing rules referred to in Article 12(2) of this Regulation.
Member States, other cross-border cooperation participating countries and international organisations concerned shall ensure the effective functioning of their management and control system, the legality and regularity of the underlying transactions and compliance with the principle of sound financial management. They shall be responsible for the management and control of the programmes.
The Commission may require the Member State or the other cross-border cooperation participating country or the international organisation concerned to examine a complaint submitted to the Commission concerning the selection or implementation of operations supported under this Title or the functioning of the management and control system.
3.   In order to allow joint operational programmes to prepare adequately for implementation, expenditure incurred after the submission of a joint operational programme to the Commission shall be eligible from 1 January 2014.
4.   Where eligibility is restricted in accordance with Article 8(7) of Regulation (EU) No 236/2014, the entity referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article, which may launch calls for proposals and tenders, shall be entitled to accept as eligible tenderers, applicants and candidates from non-eligible countries, or goods from a non-eligible origin, in accordance with Article 8(2) and Article 9(3) of Regulation (EU) No 236/2014.
