Article 9
Role of the Commission
1.   The Commission shall have overall responsibility for Copernicus and for the coordination among its different components. It shall manage the funds allocated under this Regulation and oversee the implementation of Copernicus including the setting of priorities, user involvement, cost, schedule, performance and procurement.
2.   The Commission shall manage, on behalf of the Union and in its field of competence, relationships with third countries and international organisations, ensuring the coordination of Copernicus with activities at national, Union and international levels.
3.   The Commission shall facilitate coordinated contributions of Member States aiming at the operational delivery of services and the long-term availability of necessary observation data.
4.   The Commission shall support the appropriate development of Copernicus services and ensure the complementarity, consistency and links between Copernicus and other relevant Union policies, instruments, programmes and actions in order to ensure that those policies, instruments, programmes and actions benefit from Copernicus services.
5.   The Commission shall promote a long-term stable investment environment and consult stakeholders when deciding to change products of both Copernicus data and Copernicus information services covered by this Regulation.
6.   The Commission shall ensure that any entities entrusted with implementation tasks shall provide their services to all Member States.
7.   The Commission shall adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 31 concerning the establishment of the data requirements for the evolution of the Copernicus service component referred to in Article 5(1).
8.   The Commission shall adopt implementing acts, in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 30(4) concerning:
(a)
the technical specifications for the Copernicus service component referred to in Article 5(1), regarding its implementation;
(b)
the technical specifications for the Copernicus space component referred to in Article 6, regarding its implementation and evolution on the basis of user requirements.
9.   The Commission shall provide to the Member States and the European Parliament, in a timely manner, all relevant information pertaining to Copernicus, in particular in terms of risk management, overall cost, annual operating costs of each significant item of Copernicus infrastructure, schedule, performance, procurement and the assessment of the management of intellectual property rights.
