Article 32
Evaluation
1.   By 31 December 2017, after consultation with relevant stakeholders, an evaluation report shall be established by the Commission on the achievement of the objectives of all the tasks financed by Copernicus at the level of their results and impacts, their European added value and on the efficiency of the use of resources. The evaluation shall address the continued relevance of all objectives, as well as the contribution of the measures to the objectives described in Article 4, the performance of the organisational structure and the scope of services deployed. The evaluation shall include an assessment of a possible involvement of relevant European agencies (including the European GNSS Agency) and if appropriate be accompanied by relevant legislative proposals.
In particular, the evaluation shall assess the impacts of the Copernicus data and Copernicus information policy, on stakeholders, downstream users, the influence on business as well as on national and private investments in Earth observation infrastructures.
2.   The Commission shall carry out the evaluation referred to in paragraph 1, in close cooperation with the operators and the Copernicus users, and shall examine the effectiveness and efficiency of Copernicus and its contribution to the objectives referred to in Article 4. The Commission shall communicate the result of these evaluations to the European Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions and shall, if necessary, propose appropriate measures.
3.   The Commission may, whenever necessary, be assisted by independent entities, undertake an evaluation of the methods of carrying out projects as well as the impact of their implementation, in order to assess whether the objectives, including those relating to environmental protection, have been attained.
4.   The Commission may request a Member State to provide a specific evaluation of the actions and the linked projects financed under this Regulation or, where appropriate, to supply it with the information and assistance required to undertake an evaluation of such projects.
