Article 8
Financial envelope
1.   The financial envelope for the implementation of the activities referred to in Articles 5, 6 and 7 is set at EUR 4 291,48 million in current prices for the period from 1 January 2014 to 31 December 2020.
2.   The amount referred to in paragraph 1 shall be broken down in the following categories of expenditure in current prices:
(a)
for the activities referred to in Articles 5 and 7, EUR 897,415 million;
(b)
for the activities referred to in Article 6, EUR 3 394,065 million, including a maximum amount of EUR 26,5 million for the activities referred to in point (c) of Article 6(2).
3.   The Commission may re-allocate funds from one category of expenditure, as laid down in points (a) and (b) of paragraph 2, to another, up to a ceiling of 10 % of the amount referred to in paragraph 1. Where the re-allocation reaches a cumulative amount greater than 10 % of the amount referred to in paragraph 1, the Commission shall consult the Copernicus Committee, in accordance with the advisory procedure referred to in Article 30(3).
4.   The interest generated by pre-financing payments made to entities responsible for implementing the budget indirectly shall be assigned to activities subject to the delegation agreement or the contract concluded between the Commission and the entity concerned. In accordance with the principle of sound financial management, the entities responsible for indirect implementation of the budget shall open accounts enabling the funds and corresponding interest to be identified.
5.   The annual appropriations shall be authorised by the European Parliament and the Council within the limits of the multi-annual financial framework. Budgetary commitments for activities extending over more than one financial year may be broken down over several years into annual instalments.
6.   The financial allocation for Copernicus may also cover expenses relating to preparatory, monitoring, control, audit and evaluation activities which are required directly for the management of Copernicus and the achievement of its objectives, including studies, meetings, information and communication actions, as well as expenses linked to IT networks focusing on information processing and exchange of data.
7.   The Commission may entrust the implementation of Copernicus to the entities referred to in point (c) of Article 58(1) of the Financial Regulation. Where the Copernicus budget is implemented by indirect management on the basis of Article 10(3) or 11(1), the procurement rules of the entities entrusted with budget implementation tasks shall apply to the extent allowable under Article 60 of the Financial Regulation. Specific adjustments necessary to those rules, as well as the arrangements for the prolongation of the existing contracts, shall be defined in the corresponding delegation agreements.
