Article 104
Retail of veterinary medicinal products at a distance
1.   Persons permitted to supply veterinary medicinal products in accordance with Article 103(1) of this Regulation may offer veterinary medicinal products by means of information society services in the meaning of Directive (EU) 2015/1535 of the European Parliament and of the Council (25) to natural or legal persons established in the Union provided that those veterinary medicinal products are not subject to a veterinary prescription pursuant to Article 34 of this Regulation and that they comply with this Regulation and applicable law of the Member State in which the veterinary products are retailed.
2.   By way of derogation from paragraph 1 of this Article, a Member State may allow persons permitted to supply veterinary medicinal products in accordance with Article 103(1) to offer veterinary medicinal products subject to a veterinary prescription pursuant to Article 34 by means of information society services, provided that the Member State has provided a secure system for such supplies. Such permission shall only be granted to persons established in their territory and supply shall only occur within the territory of that Member State.
3.   The Member State referred to in paragraph 2 shall ensure that adapted measures are in place in order to guarantee that the requirements relating to a veterinary prescription are respected as regards supply by means of information society services and shall notify the Commission and other Member States if it makes use of the derogation referred to in paragraph 2 and shall, when necessary, cooperate with the Commission and other Member States to avoid any unintended consequences of such supply. The Member States shall establish rules on appropriate penalties to ensure that the national rules adopted are respected, including rules on the withdrawal of such permissions.
4.   The persons and activities referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article shall be subject to the controls referred to in Article 123 by the competent authority of the Member State in which the retailer is established.
5.   In addition to the information requirements set out in Article 6 of Directive 2000/31/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (26), retailers offering veterinary medicinal products by means of information society services shall provide at least the following information:
(a)
the contact details of the competent authority of the Member State in which the retailer offering the veterinary medicinal products is established;
(b)
a hyperlink to the website of the Member State of establishment set up in accordance with paragraph 8 of this Article;
(c)
the common logo established in accordance with paragraph 6 of this Article is clearly displayed on every page of the website that relates to the offer for sale at a distance of veterinary medicinal products and contains a hyperlink to the entry of the retailer in the list of permitted retailers referred to in point (c) of paragraph 8 of this Article.
6.   The Commission shall establish a common logo pursuant to paragraph 7 that is recognisable throughout the Union, while enabling the identification of the Member State where the person offering veterinary medicinal products for sale at a distance is established. The logo shall be clearly displayed on websites offering veterinary medicinal products for sale at a distance.
7.   The Commission shall, by means of implementing acts, adopt the design of the common logo referred to in paragraph 6 of this Article. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 145(2).
8.   Each Member State shall set up a website regarding sale of veterinary medicinal products at a distance, providing at least the following information:
(a)
information on its national law applicable to the offering of veterinary medicinal products for sale at a distance by means of information society services, in accordance with paragraphs 1 and 2, including information on the fact that there may be differences between Member States regarding the classification of the supply of the veterinary medicinal products;
(b)
information on the common logo;
(c)
a list of retailers established in the Member State permitted to offer veterinary medicinal products for sale at a distance by means of information society services in accordance with paragraphs 1 and 2 as well as the website addresses of those retailers.
9.   The Agency shall set up a website providing information on the common logo. The Agency’s website shall explicitly mention that the websites of Member States contain information on persons permitted to offer veterinary medicinal products for sale at a distance by means of information society services in the relevant Member State.
10.   Members States may impose conditions, justified on grounds of public health protection, for the retail, on their territory, of veterinary medicinal products offered for sale at a distance by means of information society services.
11.   The websites set up by Member States shall contain a hyperlink to the website of the Agency set up in accordance with paragraph 9.
