Article 58
Responsibilities of the marketing authorisation holders
1.   The marketing authorisation holder shall be responsible for the marketing of its veterinary medicinal products. The designation of a representative shall not relieve the marketing authorisation holder of legal responsibility.
2.   The marketing authorisation holder shall, within the limits of its responsibilities, ensure appropriate and continued supplies of its veterinary medicinal products.
3.   After a marketing authorisation has been granted, the marketing authorisation holder shall, in respect of the methods of manufacture and control stated in the application for that marketing authorisation, take account of scientific and technical progress and introduce any changes that may be required to enable the veterinary medicinal product to be manufactured and controlled by means of generally accepted scientific methods. The introduction of such changes shall be subject to the procedures laid down in Section 3 of this Chapter.
4.   The marketing authorisation holder shall ensure that the summary of product characteristics, package leaflet and labelling is kept up to date with current scientific knowledge.
5.   The marketing authorisation holder shall not place generic veterinary medicinal products and hybrid veterinary medicinal products on the Union market until the period of the protection of technical documentation for the reference veterinary medicinal product, as set out in Articles 39 and 40, has elapsed.
6.   The marketing authorisation holder shall record in the product database the dates when its authorised veterinary medicinal products are placed on the market, information on the availability for each veterinary medicinal product in each relevant Member State and, as applicable, the dates of any suspension or revocation of the marketing authorisations concerned.
7.   On the request of the competent authorities, the marketing authorisation holder shall provide them with sufficient quantities of samples to enable controls to be made on its veterinary medicinal products placed on the Union market.
8.   On the request of a competent authority, the marketing authorisation holder shall provide technical expertise to facilitate the implementation of the analytical method for detecting residues of the veterinary medicinal products in the European Union reference laboratory designated under Regulation (EU) 2017/625.
9.   On the request of a competent authority or the Agency, the marketing authorisation holder shall, within the time limit set in that request, provide data demonstrating that the benefit-risk balance remains positive.
10.   The marketing authorisation holder shall without delay inform the competent authority which has granted the marketing authorisation or the Commission, as applicable, of any prohibition or restriction imposed by a competent authority or by an authority of a third country and of any other new information which might influence the assessment of the benefits and risks of the veterinary medicinal product concerned, including from the outcome of the signal management process carried out in accordance with Article 81.
11.   The marketing authorisation holder shall provide the competent authority, the Commission or the Agency, as applicable, within the time limit set, with all data in its possession relating to the volume of sales of the veterinary medicinal product concerned.
12.   The marketing authorisation holder shall record in the product database the annual volume of sales for each of its veterinary medicinal products.
13.   The marketing authorisation holder shall without delay inform the competent authority which has granted the marketing authorisation or the Commission, as applicable, of any action which the holder intends to take in order to cease the marketing of a veterinary medicinal product prior to taking such action, together with the reasons for such action.
