Article 18
Generic veterinary medicinal products
1.   By way of derogation from point (b) of Article 8(1), it shall not be required that an application for a marketing authorisation for a generic veterinary medicinal product contain the documentation on safety and efficacy if all the following conditions are fulfilled:
(a)
bioavailability studies have demonstrated bioequivalence of a generic veterinary medicinal product with the reference veterinary medicinal product or a justification is provided as to why such studies were not performed;
(b)
the application satisfies the requirements set out in Annex II;
(c)
the applicant demonstrates that the application concerns a generic veterinary medicinal product of a reference veterinary medicinal product for which the period of protection of the technical documentation laid down in Articles 39 and 40 has elapsed or is due to elapse in less than two years.
2.   Where the active substance of a generic veterinary medicinal product consists of salts, esters, ethers, isomers and mixtures of isomers, complexes or derivatives differing from the active substance used in the reference veterinary medicinal product, it shall be considered to be the same active substance as that used in the reference veterinary medicinal product, unless it differs significantly in respect of properties with regard to safety or efficacy. Where it differs significantly in respect of those properties, the applicant shall submit additional information in order to prove the safety or efficacy of the various salts, esters or derivatives of the authorised active substance of the reference veterinary medicinal product.
3.   Where several immediate-release oral pharmaceutical forms of a generic veterinary medicinal product are presented, they shall be considered to be the same pharmaceutical form.
4.   Where the reference veterinary medicinal product is not authorised in the Member State in which the application for the generic veterinary medicinal product is submitted, or the application is submitted in accordance with Article 42(4) and the reference veterinary medicinal product is authorised in a Member State, the applicant shall indicate in its application the Member State in which the reference veterinary medicinal product has been authorised.
5.   The competent authority or the Agency, as applicable, may request information on the reference veterinary medicinal product from the competent authority of the Member State where it is authorised. Such information shall be transmitted to the requestor within 30 days of receipt of the request.
6.   The summary of the product characteristics of the generic veterinary medicinal product shall be essentially similar to that of the reference veterinary medicinal product. However, that requirement shall not apply to those parts of the summary of the product characteristics of the reference veterinary medicinal product that refer to indications or pharmaceutical forms which are still covered by patent law at the time when the generic veterinary medicinal product is authorised.
7.   A competent authority or the Agency, as applicable, may require the applicant to provide safety data concerning the potential risks posed by the generic veterinary medicinal product to the environment where the marketing authorisation for the reference veterinary medicinal product was granted before 1 October 2005.
