Article 52
Procedure for mutual recognition of national marketing authorisations
1.   An application for mutual recognition of a national marketing authorisation shall be submitted to the competent authority in the Member State that granted the national marketing authorisation in accordance with Article 47 (‘reference Member State’) and to the competent authorities in the Member States where the applicant seeks to obtain a marketing authorisation (‘Member States concerned’).
2.   The application for mutual recognition shall list the Member States concerned.
3.   A minimum of six months shall elapse between the decision granting the national marketing authorisation and the submission of the application for mutual recognition of that national marketing authorisation.
4.   If the applicant indicates that one or more of the Member States concerned shall no longer be considered as such, the competent authorities in those Member States shall provide to the competent authority in the reference Member State and to the competent authorities in the other Member States concerned any information they consider relevant with respect to the withdrawal of the application.
5.   Within 90 days of receipt of a valid application for mutual recognition, the competent authority in the reference Member State shall prepare an updated assessment report containing the information referred to in Article 33 for the veterinary medicinal product and shall forward it to the competent authorities in the Member States concerned and to the applicant.
6.   Within 90 days of receipt of the updated assessment report referred to in paragraph 5, the competent authorities in the Member States concerned shall examine it and inform the competent authority in the reference Member State of whether they have any objections to it on the ground that the veterinary medicinal product would pose a potential serious risk to human or animal health or to the environment. The competent authority in the reference Member State shall forward the assessment report resulting from that examination to the competent authorities in the Member States concerned and to the applicant.
7.   On the request of the competent authority in the reference Member State or the competent authority in any of the Member States concerned, the coordination group shall be convened to examine the updated assessment report within the period referred to in paragraph 6.
8.   Where no competent authority of any Member State concerned has informed the competent authority in the reference Member State of an objection to the updated assessment report, as referred to in paragraph 6, the competent authority in the reference Member State shall record that there is an agreement, close the procedure and, without undue delay, inform the applicant and the competent authorities in all Member States accordingly. The competent authorities in the Member States concerned shall grant a marketing authorisation in conformity with the updated assessment report within 30 days of receipt of both the information on the agreement from the competent authority in the reference Member State and the complete translations of the summary of product characteristics, labelling and package leaflet from the applicant.
9.   Where a competent authority in a Member State concerned informs the competent authority in the reference Member State of an objection to the updated assessment report in accordance with paragraph 6 of this Article, the procedure referred to in Article 54 shall apply.
10.   If at any stage of the procedure for mutual recognition the competent authority in a Member State concerned invokes the reasons referred to in Article 110(1) for prohibiting the veterinary medicinal product, that Member State shall no longer be considered as a Member State concerned.
11.   The competent authority in the reference Member State shall make the assessment report publicly available, after deleting any commercially confidential information.
