Article 83
Union interest referral procedure
1.   The Agency shall publish on its website information that a referral has been made in accordance with Article 82 and shall invite interested parties to provide comments.
2.   The Agency shall request the Committee referred to in Article 139 to consider the referred matter. The Committee shall issue a reasoned opinion within 120 days of the matter being referred to it. That period may be extended by the Committee for a further period of up to 60 days, taking into account the views of the marketing authorisation holders concerned.
3.   Before issuing its opinion, the Committee shall provide the marketing authorisation holders concerned with the opportunity to present explanations within a specified time limit. The Committee may suspend the time limit referred to in paragraph 2 to allow the marketing authorisation holders concerned to prepare the explanations.
4.   In order to consider the matter, the Committee shall appoint one of its members to act as a rapporteur. The Committee may appoint independent experts to give advice on specific questions. When appointing such experts, the Committee shall define their tasks and specify the time limit for the completion of their tasks.
5.   Within 15 days of its adoption by the Committee, the Agency shall forward the opinion of the Committee to the Member States, the Commission and the marketing authorisation holders concerned, together with an assessment report on one or more veterinary medicinal products and the reasons for its conclusions.
6.   Within 15 days of receipt of the opinion of the Committee, the marketing authorisation holder may notify the Agency in writing of its intention to request a re-examination of that opinion. In that case, the marketing authorisation holder shall forward to the Agency the detailed reasons for the request of re-examination within 60 days of receipt of the opinion.
7.   Within 60 days of receipt of a request as referred to in paragraph 6, the Committee shall re-examine its opinion. The reasons for the conclusion reached shall be annexed to the assessment report referred to in paragraph 5.
