Article 140
Members of the Committee
1.   Each Member State shall, after consultation of the Management Board of the Agency, appoint for a three-year term which may be renewed, one member and an alternate member of the Committee. The alternates shall represent and vote for the members in their absence and may also be appointed to act as rapporteurs.
2.   Members and alternates of the Committee shall be appointed on the basis of their relevant expertise and experience in the scientific assessment of veterinary medicinal products, in order to guarantee the highest level of qualifications and a broad spectrum of relevant expertise.
3.   A Member State may delegate its tasks within the Committee to another Member State. Each Member State may represent no more than one other Member State.
4.   The Committee may co-opt a maximum of five additional members chosen on the basis of their specific scientific competence. Those members shall be appointed for a term of three years, which may be renewed, and shall not have alternates.
5.   With a view to the co-opting of such members, the Committee shall identify the specific complementary scientific competence of the additional members. Co-opted members shall be chosen among experts nominated by Member States or the Agency.
6.   The Committee may appoint, for the purpose of performing its tasks referred to in Article 141, one of its members to act as rapporteur. The Committee may also appoint a second member to act as a co-rapporteur.
7.   The members of the Committee may be accompanied by experts in specific scientific or technical fields.
8.   Members of the Committee and experts responsible for assessing veterinary medicinal products shall rely on the scientific evaluation and resources available to competent authorities. Each competent authority shall monitor and ensure the scientific level and independence of the evaluation carried out and provide appropriate contribution to the tasks of the Committee, and facilitate the activities of appointed Committee members and experts. To that end, Member States shall provide adequate scientific and technical resources to the members and experts they have nominated.
9.   Member States shall refrain from giving Committee members and experts instructions incompatible with their own individual tasks, or with the tasks of the Committee and responsibilities of the Agency.
