Article 44
Procedure for centralised marketing authorisation
1.   The Agency shall assess the application referred to in Article 43. The Agency shall prepare, as an outcome of the assessment, an opinion containing the information referred to in Article 33.
2.   The Agency shall issue the opinion referred to in paragraph 1 within 210 days of receipt of a valid application. Exceptionally, where a particular expertise is required, the time limit may be extended by a maximum of 90 days.
3.   When an application is submitted for a marketing authorisation in respect of veterinary medicinal products of major interest, particularly from the point of view of animal health and therapeutic innovation, the applicant may request an accelerated assessment procedure. The request shall be duly substantiated. If the Agency accepts the request, the time limit of 210 days shall be reduced to 150 days.
4.   The Agency shall forward the opinion to the applicant. Within 15 days of receipt of the opinion, the applicant may provide written notice to the Agency that he or she wishes to request a re-examination of the opinion. In such a case, Article 45 shall apply.
5.   Where the applicant has not provided written notice in accordance with paragraph 4, the Agency shall, without undue delay, forward its opinion to the Commission.
6.   The Commission may request clarifications from the Agency as regards the content of the opinion, in which case the Agency shall provide a response to this request within 90 days.
7.   The applicant shall submit to the Agency the necessary translations of the summary of product characteristics, package leaflet and labelling in accordance with Article 7, within the time limit set by the Agency, but at the latest on the date that the draft decision is forwarded to the competent authorities in accordance with paragraph 8 of this Article.
8.   Within 15 days of receipt of the opinion of the Agency, the Commission shall prepare a draft decision to be taken in respect of the application. Where a draft decision envisages granting of a marketing authorisation, it shall include the opinion of the Agency prepared in accordance with paragraph 1. Where the draft decision is not in accordance with the opinion of the Agency, the Commission shall annex a detailed explanation of the reasons for the differences. The Commission shall forward the draft decision to the competent authorities of Member States and to the applicant.
9.   The Commission shall, by means of implementing acts, take a decision to grant or refuse a centralised marketing authorisation in accordance with this Section and on the basis of the opinion of the Agency. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 145(2).
10.   The Agency shall make its opinion publicly available, after deleting any commercially confidential information.
