Article 6
Mutual recognition of seafarers’ certificates issued by Member States
1.   Every Member State shall accept certificates of proficiency and documentary evidence issued by another Member State, or under its authority, in hard copy or in digital format, for the purpose of allowing seafarers to serve on ships flying its flag.
2.   Every Member State shall recognise certificates of competency issued by another Member State or certificates of proficiency issued by another Member State to masters and officers in accordance with Regulations V/1-1 and V/1-2 of Annex I to this Directive, by endorsing those certificates to attest their recognition. The endorsement attesting the recognition shall be limited to the capacities, functions and levels of competency or proficiency prescribed therein. The endorsement shall be issued only if all the requirements of the STCW Convention have been complied with, in accordance with Regulation I/2, paragraph 7, of the STCW Convention. The form of the endorsement used shall be that set out in Section A-I/2, paragraph 3, of the STCW Code.
3.   Every Member State shall accept, for the purpose of allowing seafarers to serve on ships flying its flag, medical certificates issued under the authority of another Member State in accordance with Article 12.
4.   The host Member States shall ensure that the decisions referred to in paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 are issued within a reasonable time. The host Member States shall also ensure that seafarers have the right to appeal against any refusal to endorse or accept a valid certificate, or the absence of any response, in accordance with national legislation and procedures, and that seafarers are provided with adequate advice and assistance regarding such appeals in accordance with established national legislation and procedures.
5.   Without prejudice to paragraph 2 of this Article, the competent authorities of a host Member State may impose further limitations on capacities, functions and levels of competence or proficiency relating to near-coastal voyages, as referred to in Article 8, or alternative certificates issued under Regulation VII/1 of Annex I.
6.   Without prejudice to paragraph 2, a host Member State may, where necessary, allow a seafarer to serve, for a period not exceeding three months, on board a ship flying its flag, while holding an appropriate and valid certificate issued and endorsed by another Member State, but not yet endorsed for recognition by the host Member State concerned.
Documentary proof that an application for endorsement has been submitted to the competent authorities shall be readily available.
7.   A host Member State shall ensure that seafarers who present for recognition certificates for functions at management level have appropriate knowledge of the maritime legislation of that Member State relevant to the functions that they are permitted to perform.
