Article 8
Principles governing near-coastal voyages
1.   When defining near-coastal voyages Member States shall not impose training, experience or certification requirements on seafarers serving on board ships entitled to fly the flag of another Member State or another Party to the STCW Convention and engaged in such voyages in a manner resulting in more stringent requirements for such seafarers than for seafarers serving on board ships entitled to fly their own flag. In no case shall a Member State impose requirements in respect of seafarers serving on board ships flying the flag of another Member State or of another Party to the STCW Convention in excess of those of this Directive in respect of ships not engaged on near-coastal voyages.
2.   A Member State which, for ships afforded the benefits of the near-coastal voyage provisions of the STCW Convention, includes voyages off the coast of other Member States or of Parties to the STCW Convention within the limits of its definition of near-coastal voyages shall enter into an undertaking with the Member States or Parties concerned specifying both the details of the trading areas involved and other relevant provisions.
3.   With respect to ships entitled to fly the flag of a Member State regularly engaged on near-coastal voyages off the coast of another Member State or of another Party to the STCW Convention, the Member State the flag of which a ship is entitled to fly shall prescribe training, experience and certification requirements for seafarers serving on such ships at least equal to those of the Member State or the Party to the STCW Convention off the coast of which the ship is engaged on near-coastal voyages, provided that they do not exceed the requirements of this Directive in respect of ships not engaged on near-coastal voyages. Seafarers serving on a ship which extends its voyage beyond what is defined as a near-coastal voyage by a Member State and enters waters not covered by that definition shall fulfil the appropriate requirements of this Directive.
4.   A Member State may afford a ship which is entitled to fly its flag the benefits of the near-coastal voyage provisions of this Directive when it is regularly engaged off the coast of a non-Party to the STCW Convention on near-coastal voyages as defined by that Member State.
5.   The certificates of competency of seafarers issued by a Member State or a Party to the STCW Convention for its defined near-coastal voyage limits may be accepted by other Member States for service in their defined near-coastal voyage limits, provided that the Member States or Parties concerned enter into an undertaking specifying the details of the trading areas involved and other relevant conditions thereof.
6.   Member States defining near-coastal voyages, in accordance with the requirements of this Article, shall:
(a)
meet the principles governing near-coastal voyages specified in Section A-I/3 of the STCW Code;
(b)
incorporate the near-coastal voyage limits in the endorsements issued pursuant to Article 4.
7.   Upon deciding on the definition of near-coastal voyages and the conditions of education and training required therefor in accordance with the requirements of paragraphs 1, 3 and 4, Member States shall communicate to the Commission the details of the provisions they have adopted.
