Article 21
Non-compliance with the requirements of the STCW Convention
1.   Notwithstanding the criteria specified in Annex II, when a Member State considers that a recognised third country no longer complies with the requirements of the STCW Convention it shall notify the Commission immediately, giving substantiated reasons therefor.
The Commission shall refer the matter to the Committee referred to in Article 31(1) without delay.
2.   Notwithstanding the criteria set out in Annex II, when the Commission considers that a recognised third country no longer complies with the requirements of the STCW Convention it shall notify the Member States immediately, giving substantiated reasons therefor.
The Commission shall refer the matter to the Committee referred to in Article 31(1) without delay.
3.   When a Member State intends to withdraw the endorsements of all certificates issued by a third country, it shall inform the Commission and the other Member States of its intention without delay, giving substantiated reasons therefor.
4.   The Commission, assisted by the European Maritime Safety Agency, shall reassess the recognition of the third country concerned in order to verify whether that third country failed to comply with the requirements of the STCW Convention.
5.   Where there are indications that a particular maritime training establishment no longer complies with the requirements of the STCW Convention, the Commission shall notify the third country concerned that recognition of that third country’s certificates will be withdrawn in two months’ time unless measures are taken to ensure compliance with all the requirements of the STCW Convention.
6.   The decision on the withdrawal of the recognition shall be taken by the Commission. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 31(2). The Member States concerned shall take appropriate measures to implement the decision.
7.   Endorsements attesting recognition of certificates, issued in accordance with Article 4(7) before the date on which the decision to withdraw recognition of the third country is taken, shall remain valid. However, seafarers holding such endorsements may not claim an endorsement recognising a higher qualification, unless that upgrading is based solely on additional seagoing service experience.
8.   If there are no endorsements attesting recognition issued by a Member State in relation to certificates of competency or certificates of proficiency, referred to in Article 20(1), issued by a third country for a period of more than eight years, the recognition of that third country’s certificates shall be re-examined. The Commission shall adopt implementing acts laying down its decision following that re-examination. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 31(2), after notifying the Member States as well as the third country concerned at least six months in advance.
