Article 13
Revalidation of certificates of competency and certificates of proficiency
1.   Every master, officer and radio operator holding a certificate issued or recognised under any Chapter of Annex I other than Regulation V/3 of Chapter V or Chapter VI who is serving at sea or intends to return to sea after a period ashore shall, in order to continue to qualify for seagoing service, be required at intervals not exceeding five years:
(a)
to meet the standards of medical fitness prescribed by Article 12;
(b)
to establish continued professional competence in accordance with Section A-I/11 of the STCW Code.
2.   Every master, officer and radio operator shall, for continuing seagoing service on board ships for which special training requirements have been internationally agreed upon, successfully complete the approved relevant training.
3.   Every master and officer shall, for continuing seagoing service on board tankers, meet the requirements of paragraph 1 of this Article and be required, at intervals not exceeding five years, to establish continued professional competence for tankers in accordance with Section A-I/11, paragraph 3, of the STCW Code.
4.   Every master and officer shall, for continuing seagoing service on board ships operating in polar waters, meet the requirements of paragraph 1 of this Article and shall be required, at intervals not exceeding five years, to establish continued professional competence for ships operating in polar waters in accordance with Section A-I/11, paragraph 4, of the STCW Code.
5.   Each Member State shall compare the standards of competence which are required of candidates for certificates of competency and/or certificates of proficiency issued until 1 January 2017 with those specified for the relevant certificate of competency and/or certificate of proficiency in Part A of the STCW Code, and shall determine whether there is a need to require the holders of such certificates of competency and/or certificates of proficiency to undergo appropriate refresher and updating training or assessment.
6.   Each Member State shall compare the standards of competence which it required of persons serving on gas-fuelled ships before 1 January 2017 with the standards of competence in Section A-V/3 of the STCW Code, and shall determine whether there is a need to require those persons to update their qualifications.
7.   Each Member State shall, in consultation with those concerned, formulate or promote the formulation of a structure for refresher and updating courses as provided for in Section A-I/11 of the STCW Code.
8.   For the purpose of updating the knowledge of masters, officers and radio operators, each Member State shall ensure that the texts of recent changes in national and international regulations concerning the safety of life at sea, security and the protection of the marine environment are made available to ships entitled to fly its flag, while complying with Article 15(3), point (b), and Article 19.
