Article 16
Fitness for duty
1.   For the purpose of preventing fatigue, Member States shall:
(a)
establish and enforce rest periods for watchkeeping personnel and those whose duties involve designated safety, security and prevention of pollution duties in accordance with paragraphs 3 to 13;
(b)
require that watch systems are arranged in such a way that the efficiency of watchkeeping personnel is not impaired by fatigue, and that duties are organised in such a way that the first watch at the start of a voyage and subsequent relieving watches are sufficiently rested and otherwise fit for duty.
2.   Member States shall, for the purpose of preventing drug and alcohol abuse, ensure that adequate measures are established in accordance with this Article.
3.   Member States shall take account of the danger posed by fatigue of seafarers, especially those whose duties involve the safe and secure operation of a ship.
4.   All persons who are assigned duty as an officer in charge of a watch or as a rating forming part of a watch, and those whose duties involve designated safety, prevention of pollution and security duties shall be provided with a rest period of not less than:
(a)
a minimum of 10 hours of rest in any 24-hour period; and
(b)
77 hours in any seven-day period.
5.   The hours of rest may be divided into no more than two periods, one of which shall be at least six hours in length, and the intervals between consecutive periods of rest shall not exceed 14 hours.
6.   The requirements for rest periods laid down in paragraphs 4 and 5 need not be maintained in the case of an emergency or in other overriding operational conditions. Musters, firefighting and lifeboat drills and drills prescribed by national laws and regulations and by international instruments shall be conducted in a manner that minimises the disturbance of rest periods and does not induce fatigue.
7.   Member States shall require that watch schedules be posted where they are easily accessible. The schedules shall be established in a standardised format in the working language or languages of the ship and in English.
8.   When a seafarer is on call, such as when a machinery space is unattended, the seafarer shall have an adequate compensatory rest period if the normal period of rest is disturbed by call-outs to work.
9.   Member States shall require that records of the daily hours of rest of seafarers be maintained in a standardised format, in the working language or languages of the ship and in English, to allow monitoring and verification of compliance with this Article. Seafarers shall receive a copy of the records pertaining to them, which shall be endorsed by the master, or by a person authorised by the master, and by the seafarers.
10.   Notwithstanding the rules laid down in paragraphs 3 to 9, the master of a ship shall be entitled to require a seafarer to perform any hours of work necessary for the immediate safety of the ship, persons on board or cargo, or for the purpose of giving assistance to other ships or persons in distress at sea. Accordingly, the master may suspend the schedule of hours of rest and require a seafarer to perform any hours of work necessary until the normal situation has been restored. As soon as practicable after the normal situation has been restored, the master shall ensure that any seafarers who have performed work in a scheduled rest period are provided with an adequate period of rest.
11.   With due regard for the general principles of the protection of the health and safety of workers and in line with Directive 1999/63/EC Member States may, by means of national laws, regulations or a procedure for the competent authority, authorise or register collective agreements permitting exceptions to the required hours of rest set out in paragraph 4, point (b), and in paragraph 5 of this Article, provided that the rest period is not less than 70 hours in any seven-day period and respects the limits set out in paragraphs 12 and 13 of this Article. Such exceptions shall, as far as possible, follow the standards set out but may take account of more frequent or longer leave periods, or the granting of compensatory leave for watchkeeping seafarers or seafarers working on board ships on short voyages. Exceptions shall, as far as possible, take into account the guidance regarding the prevention of fatigue laid down in Section B-VIII/1 of the STCW Code. Exceptions to the minimum hours of rest provided for in paragraph 4, point (a), of this Article shall not be allowed.
12.   The exceptions referred to in paragraph 11 to the weekly rest period provided for in paragraph 4, point (b), shall not be allowed for more than two consecutive weeks. The intervals between two periods of exceptions on board shall not be less than twice the duration of the exception.
13.   In the framework of possible exceptions to paragraph 5, referred to in paragraph 11, the minimum hours of rest in any 24-hour period provided for in paragraph 4, point (a), may be divided into no more than three periods of rest, one of which shall be at least six hours in length and neither of the two other periods shall be less than one hour in length. The intervals between consecutive periods of rest shall not exceed 14 hours. Exceptions shall not extend beyond two 24-hour periods in any seven-day period.
14.   Member States shall establish, for the purpose of preventing alcohol abuse, a limit of not greater than 0,05 % blood alcohol level (BAC) or 0,25 mg/l alcohol in the breath or a quantity of alcohol leading to such alcohol concentration for masters, officers and other seafarers while performing designated safety, security and marine environmental duties.
