Article 15
Application for registration
1.   The credit rating agency shall submit an application for registration to CESR. The application shall contain information on the matters set out in Annex II.
2.   Where a group of credit rating agencies applies for registration, the members of the group shall mandate one of their number to submit all the applications to CESR on behalf of the group. The mandated credit rating agency shall provide the information on the matters set out in Annex II for each member of the group.
3.   A credit rating agency shall submit its application in the language which is required under the law of its home Member State and also in a language customary in the sphere of international finance.
An application for registration sent by CESR to the competent authority of the home Member State shall be considered to be an application submitted by the credit rating agency concerned.
4.   Within five working days of receipt of the application, CESR shall transmit copies of the application to the competent authorities of all Member States.
Within 10 working days of receipt of the application, CESR shall provide advice to the competent authority of the home Member State on the completeness of the application.
5.   Within 25 working days of receipt of the application, the competent authority of the home Member State and the members of the relevant college shall assess whether the application is complete, taking into account the advice of CESR referred to in paragraph 4. If the application is not complete, the competent authority of the home Member State shall set a deadline by which the credit rating agency is to provide additional information to it and to CESR and shall notify the members of the college and CESR accordingly.
After assessing an application as complete, the competent authority of the home Member State shall notify the credit rating agency, the members of the college and CESR accordingly.
6.   Within five working days of receipt of the additional information referred to in paragraph 5, CESR shall transmit the additional information to the competent authorities of all other Member States.
