Article 5
Monitoring compliance with Union law
1.   The National Safety Authority referred to in Article 4(2) shall monitor the railway safety standards applied to railway undertakings established in the United Kingdom using the cross-border infrastructure referred to in point (a) of Article 1(2), and applied to that cross-border infrastructure. In addition, the National Safety Authority shall check that infrastructure managers comply with the safety requirements set out in Union law and that the train drivers operating on the territory under its jurisdiction fulfil the requirements set out in the relevant provisions of Union law. The National Safety Authority shall provide the Commission and the European Union Agency for Railways with reports on this matter, which shall be accompanied, where appropriate, with a recommendation for the Commission to act in accordance with paragraph 2 of this Article.
The licencing authority referred to in Article 4(2) and (6) of this Regulation shall monitor whether the requirements of Articles 19 to 22 of Directive 2012/34/EU continue to be met in relation to railway undertakings licenced by the United Kingdom referred to in point (c) of Article 1(2) of this Regulation.
2.   Where the Commission has justified doubts that the safety standards applied to the operation of cross-border railway services or infrastructure falling within the scope of this Regulation or the part of the same infrastructure that is situated in the United Kingdom are in line with the relevant provisions of Union law, it shall without undue delay, adopt implementing acts to withdraw the benefit conferred on the holder pursuant to Article 3. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 7(2). This shall apply mutatis mutandis where the Commission has justified doubts in respect of the application of requirements for obtaining a licence as a railway undertaking or for driving a train.
3.   For the purposes of paragraph 1 of this Article, the National Safety Authority or the licensing auhority referred to in Article 4(2) and (6), respectively, may request information from the relevant competent authorities, setting a reasonable time limit. Where those relevant competent authorities do not provide the information requested within the established time limit, or provide incomplete information, the Commission may, upon notification of the National Safety Authority or licensing auhority referred to in Article 4(2) and (6) as appropriate, adopt implementing acts adopted to withdraw the benefit conferred on the holder pursuant to Article 3.Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 7(2).
4.   Before withdrawing the benefits conferred pursuant to Article 3, the Commission shall in due time inform the National Safety Authority referred to in Article 4(2), the authority having issued the safety certificates, safety authorisations and licences referred to in Article 1(2), the holders of such certificates, authorisations and licences as well as the National Safety Authority and the licensing auhority of the United Kingdom of its intention to proceed to such withdrawal and provide them with the opportunity to make their views known.
