Article 4
Rules and obligations regarding safety certificates, safety authorisations and licences
1.   Safety certificates, safety authorisations and licences governed by Article 3 of this Regulation are subject to the rules applicable to them in accordance with Directive 2004/49/EC, Directive (EU) 2016/798 from the date it becomes applicable to those authorisations, Directive 2012/34/EU and Directive 2007/59/EC, and in accordance with the implementing and delegated acts adopted under those Directives.
2.   The holders of safety certificates, safety authorisations and licences referred to in Article 1(2), and, as appropriate, the authority issuing them when different from the National Safety Authority in whose territory the infrastructure is situated in the Union respectively under whose competence the border-crossing stations and terminals listed in the Annex falls shall cooperate with that National Safety Authority and deliver to it all relevant information and documents.
3.   Where information or documents have not been delivered within the time limits set in requests made by the National Safety Authority referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article, the Commission may, upon notification by the National Safety Authority, adopt implementing acts to withdraw the benefit conferred on the holder pursuant to Article 3. Those implementig acts shall be adopted in accordance with examination procedure referred to in Article 7(2).
4.   Holders of safety certificates, safety authorisations and licences referred to in points (a), (b) and (d) of Article 1(2) of this Regulation shall inform without delay the Commission and the European Union Agency for Railways of any actions by other competent safety authorities, which may conflict with their obligations under this Regulation, Directive 2004/49/EC, Directive 2007/59/EC or Directive (EU) 2016/798.
Holders of licences referred to in point (c) of Article 1(2) shall inform without delay the Commission of any actions by other competent authorities which may conflict with their obligations under this Regulation or under Directive 2012/34/EU.
5.   Before withdrawing the benefits conferred pursuant to Article 3 the Commission shall in due time inform the National Safety Authority referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article, the authority having issued the safety certificates, safety authorisations and licences referred to in Article 1(2), and the holders of such certificates, authorisations and licences of its intention to proceed to such withdrawal and shall provide them with the opportunity to make their views known.
6.   As regards the licences referred to in point (c) of Article 1(2), for the purposes of paragraphs (1) to (5) of this Article, references to a National Safety Authority shall be understood as references to a licencing authority defined in point (15) of Article 3 of Directive 2012/34/EU.
