Article 8
1.   For river basin districts, or units of management referred to in Article 3(2)(b), which fall entirely within their territory, Member States shall ensure that one single flood risk management plan, or a set of flood risk management plans coordinated at the level of the river basin district, is produced.
2.   Where an international river basin district, or unit of management referred to in Article 3(2)(b), falls entirely within the Community, Member States shall ensure coordination with the aim of producing one single international flood risk management plan, or a set of flood risk management plans coordinated at the level of the international river basin district. Where such plans are not produced, Member States shall produce flood risk management plans covering at least the parts of the international river basin district falling within their territory, as far as possible coordinated at the level of the international river basin district.
3.   Where an international river basin district, or unit of management referred to in Article 3(2)(b), extends beyond the boundaries of the Community, Member States shall endeavour to produce one single international flood risk management plan or a set of flood risk management plans coordinated at the level of the international river basin district; where this is not possible, paragraph 2 shall apply for the parts of the international river basin falling within their territory.
4.   The flood risk management plans referred to in paragraphs 2 and 3 shall be supplemented, where considered appropriate by countries sharing a sub-basin, by more detailed flood risk management plans coordinated at the level of the international sub-basins.
5.   Where a Member State identifies an issue which has an impact on the management of flood risks of its water and that issue cannot be resolved by that Member State, it may report the issue to the Commission and any other Member State concerned and may make recommendations as to how the issue should be resolved.
The Commission shall respond to any report or recommendations from Member States within a period of six months.
