Article 7
1.   On the basis of the maps referred to in Article 6, Member States shall establish flood risk management plans coordinated at the level of the river basin district, or unit of management referred to in Article 3(2)(b), for the areas identified under Article 5(1) and the areas covered by Article 13(1)(b) in accordance with paragraphs 2 and 3 of this Article.
2.   Member States shall establish appropriate objectives for the management of flood risks for the areas identified under Article 5(1) and the areas covered by Article 13(1)(b), focusing on the reduction of potential adverse consequences of flooding for human health, the environment, cultural heritage and economic activity, and, if considered appropriate, on non-structural initiatives and/or on the reduction of the likelihood of flooding.
3.   Flood risk management plans shall include measures for achieving the objectives established in accordance with paragraph 2 and shall include the components set out in Part A of the Annex.
Flood risk management plans shall take into account relevant aspects such as costs and benefits, flood extent and flood conveyance routes and areas which have the potential to retain flood water, such as natural floodplains, the environmental objectives of Article 4 of Directive 2000/60/EC, soil and water management, spatial planning, land use, nature conservation, navigation and port infrastructure.
Flood risk management plans shall address all aspects of flood risk management focusing on prevention, protection, preparedness, including flood forecasts and early warning systems and taking into account the characteristics of the particular river basin or sub-basin. Flood risk management plans may also include the promotion of sustainable land use practices, improvement of water retention as well as the controlled flooding of certain areas in the case of a flood event.
4.   In the interests of solidarity, flood risk management plans established in one Member State shall not include measures which, by their extent and impact, significantly increase flood risks upstream or downstream of other countries in the same river basin or sub-basin, unless these measures have been coordinated and an agreed solution has been found among the Member States concerned in the framework of Article 8.
5.   Member States shall ensure that flood risk management plans are completed and published by 22 December 2015.
