Article 9
Competent authorities and single point of contact
1.   Each Member State shall designate or establish one or more competent authorities responsible for the correct application and, where necessary, enforcement of the rules set out in this Directive at national level.
As regards the critical entities in the sectors set out in points 3 and 4 of the table in the Annex to this Directive, the competent authorities shall, in principle, be the competent authorities referred to in Article 46 of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554. As regards the critical entities in the sector set out in point 8 of the table in the Annex to this Directive, the competent authorities shall, in principle, be the competent authorities under Directive (EU) 2022/2555. Member States may designate a different competent authority for the sectors set out in points 3, 4 and 8 of the table in the Annex to this Directive in accordance with existing national frameworks.
Where Member States designate or establish more than one competent authority, they shall clearly set out the tasks of each of the authorities concerned and ensure that they cooperate effectively to fulfil their tasks under this Directive, including with regard to the designation and activities of the single point of contact referred to in paragraph 2.
2.   Each Member State shall designate or establish one single point of contact to exercise a liaison function for the purpose of ensuring cross-border cooperation with the single points of contact of other Member States and the Critical Entities Resilience Group referred to in Article 19 (‘single point of contact’). Where relevant, a Member State shall designate its single point of contact within a competent authority. Where relevant, a Member State may provide that its single point of contact also exercise a liaison function with the Commission and ensure cooperation with third countries.
3.   By 17 July 2028, and every two years thereafter, the single points of contact shall submit a summary report to the Commission and to the Critical Entities Resilience Group referred to in Article 19 on the notifications they have received, including the number of notifications, the nature of notified incidents and the actions taken in accordance with Article 15(3).
The Commission shall, in cooperation with the Critical Entities Resilience Group, develop a common reporting template. The competent authorities may use, on a voluntary basis, that common reporting template for the purpose of submitting summary reports as referred to in the first subparagraph.
4.   Each Member State shall ensure that its competent authority and single point of contact have the powers and the adequate financial, human and technical resources to carry out, in an effective and efficient manner, the tasks assigned to them.
5.   Each Member State shall ensure that its competent authority, whenever appropriate, and in accordance with Union and national law, consults and cooperates with other relevant national authorities, including those in charge of civil protection, law enforcement and the protection of personal data, and with critical entities and relevant interested parties.
6.   Each Member State shall ensure that its competent authority under this Directive cooperates and exchanges information with competent authorities under Directive (EU) 2022/2555 on cybersecurity risks, cyber threats and cyber incidents and non-cyber risks, threats and incidents affecting critical entities, including with regard to relevant measures its competent authority and competent authorities under Directive (EU) 2022/2555 have taken.
7.   Within three months of the designation or establishment of the competent authority and the single point of contact, each Member State shall notify the Commission of their identity and their tasks and responsibilities under this Directive, their contact details and any subsequent change thereto. Member States shall inform the Commission where they decide to designate an authority other than the competent authorities referred to in paragraph 1, second subparagraph, as the competent authorities in respect of the critical entities in the sectors set out in points 3, 4 and 8 of the table in the Annex. Each Member State shall make public the identity of its competent authority and single point of contact.
8.   The Commission shall make a list of the single points of contact publicly available.
