Article 15
Review and report
1.   The Commission shall, in 2023, thoroughly review the effectiveness of this Regulation and submit a report to the European Parliament and to the Council with the result of the review.
2.   In the report referred to in paragraph 1, the Commission shall consider, inter alia, the real-world representativeness of the CO2 emission and fuel or energy consumption values determined pursuant to Regulation (EC) No 715/2007; the deployment on the Union market of zero- and low-emission vehicles, in particular with respect to light commercial vehicles; the roll-out of recharging and refuelling infrastructure reported under Directive 2014/94/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council (20), including their financing; the potential contribution of the use of synthetic and advanced alternative fuels produced with renewable energy to emissions reductions; the CO2 emissions reduction actually observed at the existing fleet level; the functioning of the incentive mechanism for zero- and low-emission vehicles; the potential effects of the transitional measure set out in point 6.3 of Part A of Annex I; the impact of this Regulation on consumers, particularly on those on low and medium incomes; as well as aspects to further facilitate an economically viable and socially fair transition towards clean, competitive and affordable mobility in the Union.
The Commission shall, in that report, also identify a clear pathway for further CO2 emissions reductions for passenger cars and light commercial vehicles beyond 2030 in order to significantly contribute to achieving the long-term goal of the Paris Agreement.
3.   The report referred to in paragraph 2 shall, where appropriate, be accompanied by a proposal for amending this Regulation, in particular, the possible revision of the EU fleet-wide targets for 2030 in light of the elements listed in paragraph 2, and the introduction of binding emissions reduction targets for 2035 and 2040 onwards for passenger cars and light commercial vehicles to ensure the timely transformation of the transport sector towards achieving net-zero emissions in line with the objectives of the Paris Agreement.
4.   As part of the review referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article, the Commission shall assess the feasibility of developing real-world emission test procedures using portable emission measurement systems (PEMS). The Commission shall take into account that assessment as well as those made pursuant to Article 12 of this Regulation and may, where appropriate, review the procedures for measuring CO2 emissions as set out under Regulation (EC) No 715/2007. The Commission shall, in particular, make appropriate proposals to adapt those procedures to reflect adequately the real-world CO2 emissions of passenger cars and light commercial vehicles.
5.   As part of the review referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article, the Commission shall evaluate the possibility to assign the revenue from the excess emissions premiums to a specific fund or a relevant programme, with the objective to ensure a just transition towards a climate-neutral economy as referred to in Article 4.1 of the Paris Agreement, in particular to support re-skilling, up-skilling and other skills training and reallocation of workers in the automotive sector in all affected Member States, in particular in the regions and the communities most affected by the transition. The Commission shall, if appropriate, make a legislative proposal to that effect by 2027 at the latest.
6.   By 31 December 2020, the Commission shall review Directive 1999/94/EC considering the need to provide consumers with accurate, robust and comparable information on the fuel consumption, CO2 emissions and air pollutant emissions of new passenger cars placed on the market, as well as evaluate the options for introducing a fuel economy and CO2 emissions label for new light commercial vehicles. The review shall, where appropriate, be accompanied by a legislative proposal.
7.   The Commission shall, by means of implementing acts, determine the correlation parameters necessary in order to reflect any change in the regulatory test procedure for the measurement of specific emissions of CO2 referred to in Regulations (EC) No 715/2007 and (EC) No 692/2008 and, where applicable, Regulation (EU) 2017/1151. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 16(2) of this Regulation.
8.   The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 17 in order to amend this Regulation by adapting the formulae set out in Annex I, using the methodology adopted pursuant to paragraph 7 of this Article, while ensuring that reduction requirements of comparable stringency for manufacturers and vehicles of different utility are required under the old and new test procedures.
