Whereas:
(1)
Regulation (EC) No 443/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council (3) and Regulation (EU) No 510/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council (4) have been substantially amended several times. Since further amendments are to be made, those Regulations should be recast in the interests of clarity.
(2)
In order to provide a coherent and efficient transition following the recast and repeal of Regulations (EC) No 443/2009 and (EU) No 510/2011, this Regulation should apply from 1 January 2020. However, it is appropriate to maintain the CO2 emission performance standards and the modalities for achieving them as set out in those Regulations without changes until 2024.
(3)
The Paris Agreement (5) sets out, inter alia, a long-term goal in line with the objective to keep the global average temperature increase well below 2 °C above pre-industrial levels and to pursue efforts to keep it to 1,5 °C above pre-industrial levels. The latest scientific findings reported by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) in its special report on the impacts of global warming of 1,5 °C above pre-industrial levels and related global greenhouse gas emission pathways unequivocally confirm the negative impacts of climate change. That special report concludes that emissions reductions in all sectors are crucial to limit global warming.
(4)
In order to contribute to the objectives of the Paris Agreement, the transformation of the entire transport sector towards zero emissions needs to be accelerated, considering the Commission's communication of 28 November 2018 entitled ‘A Clean Planet for all — a European strategic long-term vision for a prosperous, modern, competitive and climate neutral economy’, which outlines a vision of the economic and societal transformations required, engaging all sectors of the economy and society, to achieve the transition to net-zero greenhouse gas emissions by 2050. Emissions of air pollutants from transport that significantly harm our health and the environment need also to be drastically reduced without delay. Emissions from conventional combustion engine vehicles will need to be further reduced after 2020. Zero- and low-emission vehicles will need to be deployed and gain significant market share by 2030. Further CO2 emissions reductions for passenger cars and light commercial vehicles will be necessary beyond 2030.
(5)
The Commission's communications of 31 May 2017 entitled ‘Europe on the move — An agenda for a socially fair transition towards clean, competitive and connected mobility for all’ and of 8 November 2017 entitled ‘Delivering on low-emission mobility — A European Union that protects the planet, empowers its consumers and defends its industry and workers’ highlight that the CO2 emission performance standards for passenger cars and light commercial vehicles are a strong driver for innovation and efficiency and will contribute to strengthening competitiveness of the automotive industry and pave the way for zero- and low-emission vehicles in a technology-neutral way.
(6)
This Regulation provides a clear pathway for CO2 emissions reductions from the road transport sector and contributes to the binding target of at least a 40 % domestic reduction in economy-wide greenhouse gas emissions by 2030 compared to 1990, as was endorsed in the European Council conclusions of 23-24 October 2014, and approved as the Intended Nationally Determined Contribution of the Union and its Member States under the Paris Agreement at the Environment Council meeting on 6 March 2015.
(7)
Regulation (EU) 2018/842 of the European Parliament and of the Council (6) lays down obligations on Member States to fulfil the Union's target of reducing its greenhouse gas emissions by 30 % below 2005 levels in 2030 for the sectors that are not part of the European Union Emissions Trading System established by Directive 2003/87/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (7). Road transport is a major contributor to the emissions from those sectors. Moreover, emissions from road transport show an increasing trend, and remain significantly above 1990 levels. If road transport emissions increase further, such increases will continue to counteract emissions reductions made by other sectors to combat climate change.
(8)
The European Council conclusions of 23-24 October 2014 highlighted the importance of reducing greenhouse gas emissions and risks related to fossil fuel dependency in the transport sector through a comprehensive and technology neutral approach for the promotion of emissions reduction and energy efficiency in transport, for electric transportation and for renewable energy sources in transport also after 2020.
(9)
In order to give consumers in the Union secure, sustainable, competitive and affordable energy, energy efficiency contributing to moderation of demand is one of the five mutually-reinforcing and closely interrelated dimensions set out in the Commission's communication of 25 February 2015 entitled ‘A Framework Strategy for a Resilient Energy Union with a Forward-Looking Climate Change Policy’. That communication states that, while all economic sectors must take steps to increase the efficiency of their energy consumption, transport has a huge energy efficiency potential, which can be realised also with a continued focus on tightening CO2 emission performance standards for passenger cars and light commercial vehicles in a 2030 perspective.
(10)
An evaluation of Regulations (EC) No 443/2009 and (EU) No 510/2011 in 2015 concluded that those Regulations have been relevant, broadly coherent, and have generated significant emissions savings, whilst being more cost-effective than originally anticipated. They have also generated significant added value for the Union that could not have been achieved to the same extent through national measures. However, the benefits of those Regulations have been eroded due to the increasing discrepancy between the CO2 emissions measured under the New European Driving Cycle (NEDC) and the CO2 emissions emitted from vehicles driven under real-world conditions.
(11)
It is, therefore, appropriate to pursue the objectives of Regulations (EC) No 443/2009 and (EU) No 510/2011 by setting new EU fleet-wide CO2 emissions reduction targets for passenger cars and light commercial vehicles for the period up to 2030. In defining the levels of those targets, account has been taken of their effectiveness in delivering a cost-effective contribution to reducing emissions of the sectors covered by Regulation (EU) 2018/842 by 2030, of the resulting costs and savings for society, manufacturers and vehicle users, as well as of their direct and indirect implications for employment, competitiveness and innovation and the co-benefits generated in terms of reduced air pollution and energy security. Considering that the market share and, consequently, the overall contribution of CO2 emissions from passenger cars are significantly higher than those of light commercial vehicles, a differentiated approach between passenger cars and light commercial vehicles is considered appropriate.
(12)
A socially acceptable and just transition towards zero-emission mobility should be ensured. It is important, therefore, to take into account the social effects of such transition throughout the whole automotive value chain and to address proactively the implications on employment. Targeted programmes at Union, national and regional levels are therefore to be considered for the re-skilling, up-skilling and redeployment of workers, as well as education and job-seeking initiatives in adversely affected communities and regions, in close dialogue with the social partners and competent authorities. As part of that transition, women's employment, as well as equal opportunities in this sector, should be strengthened.
(13)
A successful transition to zero-emission mobility requires an integrated approach and the right enabling environment to stimulate innovation and maintain the Union's technological leadership in this sector. That includes public and private investments in research and innovation, the increasing supply of zero- and low-emission vehicles, the roll-out of recharging and refuelling infrastructure, integration into the energy systems, as well as the sustainable materials supply and sustainable production, re-use and recycling of batteries in Europe. That requires coherent action at Union, national, regional and local levels.
(14)
As part of the implementation of Regulation (EC) No 715/2007 of the European Parliament and of the Council (8), a new test procedure for measuring CO2 emissions from, and fuel consumption of, passenger cars and light commercial vehicles, the Worldwide Harmonised Light Vehicles Test procedure (‘WLTP’), set out in Commission Regulation (EU) 2017/1151 (9), started to apply in 2017. That test procedure provides CO2 emission and fuel consumption values that are more representative of real-world conditions.
It is appropriate, therefore, that the new CO2 emissions targets should be based on the CO2 emissions determined on the basis of that test procedure. Considering, however, that WLTP-based CO2 emissions will be available for target compliance purposes from 2021, it is appropriate that the new CO2 emission performance standards should be defined as reduction levels set in relation to the 2021 targets calculated on the basis of the CO2 emissions measured for the purpose of the WLTP emissions test. In order to ensure the robustness and representativeness of the values used as the starting point for defining the emissions reduction targets to be applied in 2025 and 2030, the conditions for performing those measurements have been clarified as part of the implementation of Commission Implementing Regulations (EU) 2017/1152 (10) and (EU) 2017/1153 (11).
(15)
It is important that the setting of CO2 emissions reduction requirements continue to provide Union-wide predictability and planning security for vehicle manufacturers across their new passenger car and light commercial vehicle fleets in the Union.
(16)
The Commission's evaluation of Directive 1999/94/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (12) in 2016 identified a need for further clarification and simplification of that legislative act, which could increase its relevance, effectiveness, efficiency and coherence. The Commission should, therefore, review that Directive no later than 31 December 2020 and, where appropriate, put forward a relevant legislative proposal. In order to support the uptake of the most fuel efficient and environmentally friendly vehicles, that review should in particular consider the inclusion of light commercial vehicles and the need for better designed and further harmonised Union requirements on labelling that could provide consumers with comparable, reliable and user friendly information about the benefits of zero- and low-emission vehicles, including information concerning air pollutants.
(17)
Emissions reduction targets for the Union-wide fleets of new passenger cars and light commercial vehicles should, therefore, be set for 2025 and for 2030, taking into account the vehicle fleet renewal time and the need for the road transport sector to contribute to the 2030 climate and energy targets. That stepwise approach also provides a clear and early signal for the automotive industry not to delay the market introduction of energy efficient technologies and zero- and low-emission vehicles.
(18)
The CO2 emission performance standards set out in this Regulation apply to new passenger cars and new light commercial vehicles. With regard to the existing fleet of such vehicles, including second-hand vehicles, additional measures aimed at reducing emissions may also be taken, inter alia, at national and Union level. For instance, measures may be taken to encourage a higher fleet renewal rate, in order to replace as fast as possible older, more emitting vehicles by more performant ones. Access to more affordable zero- and low-emission vehicles could stimulate consumer behaviour change and faster deployment of low-emission technologies.
(19)
While the Union is among the world's major producers of motor vehicles and demonstrates technological leadership in the global automotive sector, competition is increasing and this sector is changing rapidly through new innovations in electrified powertrains, and cooperative, connected and automated mobility. In order to retain its global competitiveness and access to markets, the Union needs a regulatory framework, including a particular incentive in the area of zero- and low-emission vehicles, which will contribute to creating a large domestic market and support technological development and innovation.
(20)
A dedicated incentive mechanism should be introduced to facilitate a smooth transition towards zero-emission mobility. That mechanism should be designed so as to promote the deployment on the Union market of zero- and low-emission vehicles. Also, a specific transitional measure should be put in place to enable access to zero- and low-emission vehicles to consumers from Member States with low levels of market penetration of such vehicles.
(21)
Setting appropriate benchmarks for the share of zero- and low-emission vehicles in the EU fleet, together with a well-designed mechanism for adjusting a manufacturer's specific emissions target based on the share of zero- and low-emission vehicles in the manufacturer's own fleet, should provide a strong and credible signal for the development, deployment and marketing of such vehicles while still allowing for the further improvement of the efficiency of the conventional internal combustion engines.
(22)
In determining the credits for the zero- and low-emission vehicles, it is appropriate to account for the difference in CO2 emissions between the vehicles. As concerns passenger cars, the role of low-emission vehicles, in particular of plug-in hybrid vehicles, in the transition towards zero-emission vehicles should be recognised. The adjustment mechanism should ensure that a manufacturer exceeding the benchmark level would benefit from a higher specific emissions target. In order to ensure a balanced approach, limits should be set to the level of adjustment possible within that mechanism. This will provide for incentives, promoting a timely roll-out of recharging and refuelling infrastructure and yielding high benefits for consumers, competitiveness and the environment.
(23)
The legislative framework for implementing the EU fleet-wide target should ensure competitively neutral, socially equitable and sustainable emissions reduction targets which take account of the diversity of European automobile manufacturers and avoid any unjustified distortion of competition between them.
(24)
In order to maintain the diversity of the market for passenger cars and light commercial vehicles and its ability to cater for different consumer needs, specific emissions targets should be defined according to the utility of the vehicles on a linear basis. Maintaining mass as the utility parameter is considered coherent with the existing regime. In order to better reflect the mass of vehicles used on the road, the parameter should be changed, with effect from 2025, from mass in running order to the vehicle's test mass, as specified in the WLTP.
(25)
It should be avoided that the EU fleet-wide targets are altered due to changes in the average mass of the fleet. Changes in the average mass should therefore be reflected without delay in the specific emissions target calculations, and the adjustments of the average mass value that is used to this end should take place every two years with effect from 2025.
(26)
In order to distribute the emissions reduction effort in a competitively neutral and fair way that reflects the diversity of the market for passenger cars and light commercial vehicles, and in view of the change in 2021 to WLTP-based specific emissions targets, it is appropriate to determine the slope of the limit value curve on the basis of the specific emissions of CO2 of all new vehicles registered in that year, and to take into account the change in the EU fleet-wide targets between 2021, 2025 and 2030 with a view to ensuring an equal emissions reduction effort of all manufacturers. With regard to light commercial vehicles, the same approach as that for passenger car manufacturers should apply to manufacturers of lighter, car derived vans, while for manufacturers of vehicles falling within the heavier segments, a higher and fixed slope should be set for the whole target period.
(27)
This Regulation aims to achieve its objectives by, inter alia, creating incentives for the automotive industry to invest in new technologies. This Regulation actively promotes eco-innovation and provides a mechanism that should be able to acknowledge future technological development. Experience shows that eco-innovations have successfully contributed to the cost-effectiveness of Regulations (EC) No 443/2009 and (EU) No 510/2011 and to the reduction of real-world CO2 emissions. This modality should, therefore, be maintained and the scope should be extended to incentivise efficiency improvements in air-conditioning systems.
(28)
A balance should be ensured, however, between incentives given to eco-innovations and those technologies for which the emissions reduction effect is demonstrated on the official test procedure. As a consequence, it is appropriate to maintain a cap on the eco-innovation savings that a manufacturer may take into account for target compliance purposes. The Commission should have the possibility to review the level of that cap, in particular, to take into account the effects of the change in the official test procedure. It is also appropriate to clarify how the savings should be calculated for target compliance purposes.
(29)
Sustainable light-weight components are important in reducing the energy consumption and CO2 emissions of new vehicles. Their further development and deployment should support the transition towards zero- and low-emission mobility.
(30)
Directive 2007/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (13) established a harmonised framework containing the administrative provisions and general technical requirements for approval of all new vehicles within its scope. The entity responsible for complying with this Regulation should be the same as the entity responsible for all aspects of the type-approval process in accordance with Directive 2007/46/EC and for ensuring conformity of production.
(31)
For the purposes of type-approval, specific requirements apply for special-purpose vehicles, as defined in Annex II to Directive 2007/46/EC, and they should therefore be excluded from the scope of this Regulation.
(32)
In cases where zero-emission light commercial vehicles with a reference mass exceeding 2 610 kg or 2 840 kg, as the case may be, would fall outside the scope of this Regulation due only to the mass of the energy storage system, it is appropriate to allow those vehicles to be counted as falling within the scope.
(33)
It is not appropriate to use the same method to determine the emissions reduction targets for large-volume manufacturers as for small-volume manufacturers that are considered as independent on the basis of the criteria set out in this Regulation. Those small-volume manufacturers should have the possibility to apply for alternative emissions reduction targets relating to the technological potential of a given manufacturer's vehicles to reduce their specific emissions of CO2 and consistent with the characteristics of the market segments concerned.
(34)
In recognition of the disproportionate impact on the smallest manufacturers that would result from compliance with specific emissions targets defined on the basis of the utility of the vehicle, the high administrative burden of the derogation procedure, and the marginal resulting benefit in terms of CO2 emissions reduction from the vehicles sold by those manufacturers, manufacturers responsible for fewer than 1 000 new passenger cars and new light commercial vehicles registered annually in the Union should be excluded from the scope of the specific emissions target and the excess emissions premium. However, where a manufacturer that is covered by an exemption nevertheless applies for, and is granted, a derogation, it is appropriate that such manufacturer should be required to comply with that derogation target.
(35)
The procedure for granting derogations from the 95 g CO2/km EU fleet-wide target to niche car manufacturers ensures that the emissions reduction effort required by those niche manufacturers is consistent with that of large-volume manufacturers with regard to that target. It is appropriate to continue to provide those niche manufacturers with the possibility of being granted a derogation also from the targets applicable from 2025, until 2028.
(36)
In determining the average specific emissions of CO2 for all the new passenger cars and new light commercial vehicles registered in the Union for which manufacturers are responsible, all passenger cars and light commercial vehicles should be taken into account irrespective of their mass or other characteristics, as the case may be. Although Regulation (EC) No 715/2007 does not cover passenger cars and light commercial vehicles with a reference mass exceeding 2 610 kg and to which type-approval is not extended in accordance with Article 2(2) of that Regulation, the emissions for these vehicles should be measured in accordance with the same measurement procedures as specified pursuant to Regulation (EC) No 715/2007, notably the procedures set out in Commission Regulation (EC) No 692/2008 (14) and in Regulation (EU) 2017/1151, and the correlation procedures adopted on the basis of Regulations (EC) No 443/2009 and (EU) No 510/2011, in particular Implementing Regulations (EU) 2017/1152 and (EU) 2017/1153. The resulting CO2 emission values should be entered in the certificate of conformity of the vehicle in order to enable their inclusion in the monitoring scheme.
(37)
The specific emissions of CO2 of completed light commercial vehicles should be allocated to the manufacturer of the base vehicle.
(38)
Consideration should be given to the specific situation of manufacturers of light commercial vehicles producing incomplete vehicles that are type-approved in multiple stages. While those manufacturers are responsible for meeting the CO2 emissions targets, they should have the possibility to predict with reasonable certainty the CO2 emissions of the completed vehicles. The Commission should ensure that those needs are appropriately reflected in the implementing measures adopted pursuant to Regulation (EC) No 715/2007.
(39)
In order to provide for flexibility for the purposes of meeting their targets under this Regulation, manufacturers may agree to form a pool on an open, transparent and non-discriminatory basis. An agreement to form a pool should not exceed five years but should be able to be renewed. Where manufacturers form a pool, they should be deemed to have met their targets under this Regulation provided that the average emissions of the pool as a whole do not exceed the specific emissions target for the pool.
(40)
The possibility for manufacturers to form pools has proven a cost-effective way to achieve compliance with the CO2 emissions targets, in particular facilitating compliance for those manufacturers that produce a limited range of vehicles. In order to improve competitive neutrality, the Commission should have the powers to clarify the conditions on which independent manufacturers may form a pool in order to allow them to be placed in a position equivalent to connected undertakings.
(41)
A robust compliance mechanism is necessary in order to ensure that the targets under this Regulation are met.
(42)
For achieving the CO2 emissions reductions required under this Regulation, it is also essential that the emissions of vehicles in use are in conformity with the CO2 values determined at type-approval. It should therefore be possible for the Commission to take into account in the calculation of the average specific emissions of CO2 of a manufacturer any systemic non-conformity found by type-approval authorities with regard to the CO2 emissions of vehicles in use.
(43)
The Commission should have the powers to establish and implement a procedure for verifying the correspondence between the CO2 emissions of vehicles in-service, as determined in accordance with the WLTP, and the CO2 emission values recorded in the certificates of conformity. In developing that procedure, particular consideration should be given to identifying methods, including the use of data from on-board fuel and/or energy consumption monitoring devices, for detecting strategies through which a vehicle's CO2 performance is artificially improved in the type-approval test procedure. Where deviations or strategies that artificially improve a vehicle's CO2 performance are found in the course of such verifications, those findings are to be considered as sufficient reason to suspect that there is a serious risk of non-compliance with regard to the requirements laid down in Regulation (EU) 2018/858 of the European Parliament and of the Council (15) and Regulation (EC) No 715/2007, and Member States should on that basis take the necessary measures pursuant to Chapter XI of Regulation (EU) 2018/858.
(44)
The specific emissions of CO2 from new passenger cars and light commercial vehicles are measured on a harmonised basis in the Union in accordance with the WLTP. To minimise the administrative burden of this Regulation, compliance should be measured by reference to data on registrations of new passenger cars and light commercial vehicles in the Union collected by Member States and reported to the Commission. To ensure the consistency of the data used to assess compliance, the rules for the collection and reporting of that data should be harmonised as far as possible. The competent authorities' responsibility to provide correct and complete data should, therefore, be clearly stated as well as the need for an effective cooperation between those authorities and the Commission in addressing data quality issues.
(45)
Manufacturers' compliance with the targets set out in this Regulation should be assessed at Union level. Manufacturers whose average specific emissions of CO2 exceed those permitted under this Regulation should pay an excess emissions premium with respect to each calendar year. The amounts of the excess emissions premium should be considered as revenue for the general budget of the Union. The Commission should, in its 2023 review, evaluate the possibility of allocating the amounts of the excess emissions premium to a specific fund or a relevant programme that aims to ensure a just transition towards zero-emission mobility and to support re-skilling, up-skilling and other skills training of workers in the automotive sector.
(46)
Any national measure that Member States may maintain or introduce in accordance with Article 193 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU) should not, in consideration of the purpose of, and procedures established in, this Regulation, impose additional or more stringent penalties on manufacturers who fail to meet their targets under this Regulation.
(47)
This Regulation should be without prejudice to the full application of Union competition rules.
(48)
The effectiveness of the targets set out in this Regulation in reducing CO2 emissions in reality is strongly dependent on the real-world representativeness of the official test procedure. In accordance with scientific opinion 1/2016 of the Scientific Advice Mechanism (SAM) entitled ‘Closing the gap between light-duty vehicle real-world CO2 emissions and laboratory testing’ and the European Parliament recommendation of 4 April 2017 to the Council and the Commission following its inquiry into emission measurements in the automotive sector (16), a mechanism should be put in place to assess the real-world representativeness of vehicle CO2 emissions and energy consumption values determined in accordance with the WLTP. The most reliable way to ensure the real-world representativeness of type-approval values is by using data from the on-board fuel and/or energy consumption monitoring devices. The Commission should, therefore, have the powers to develop the procedures needed for collecting and processing fuel and energy consumption data required for making such assessments and to ensure the public availability of such data, whilst providing for the protection of any personal data. Moreover, it is appropriate, in order to ensure the availability of fuel and energy consumption data from battery electric vehicles and vehicles with power trains using gaseous fuels, including hydrogen, that the work on standardisation of the on-board fuel and/or energy consumption monitoring devices for such vehicles will be pursued without delay as part of the implementation of Regulation (EU) 2017/1151.
(49)
The Commission should, moreover, assess how fuel and energy consumption data may help to ensure that the vehicle CO2 emissions determined in accordance with the WLTP remain representative of real-world emissions over time for all manufacturers and, more precisely, how such data can be used to monitor the gap between laboratory and real-world CO2 emissions and, where necessary, to prevent this gap from increasing.
(50)
It is important to assess the full life-cycle emissions from passenger cars and light commercial vehicles at Union level. To that end, the Commission should no later than 2023 evaluate the possibility of developing a common Union methodology for the assessment and the consistent data reporting of the full life-cycle CO2 emissions of such vehicles placed on the Union market. The Commission should adopt follow-up measures, including, where appropriate, legislative proposals.
(51)
In 2024, a review of the progress achieved under Regulation (EU) 2018/842 and Directive 2003/87/EC will take place. It is therefore appropriate to review comprehensively the effectiveness of this Regulation in 2023 to allow a coordinated and coherent assessment of the measures implemented under all those instruments. In that review of 2023, the Commission should also identify a clear pathway for further CO2 emissions reductions for passenger cars and light commercial vehicles beyond 2030 in order to significantly contribute to achieving the long-term goal of the Paris Agreement. Where appropriate, the report on that review should be accompanied by a proposal to amend this Regulation.
(52)
In order to ensure uniform conditions for the implementation of this Regulation, implementing powers should be conferred on the Commission in relation to the specification of detailed conditions for pooling arrangements, adoption of detailed rules on the procedures for monitoring and reporting of data on average emissions and on the application of Annexes II and III, adoption of detailed rules on the procedures for reporting of deviations found, as a result of verifications, in the CO2 emissions of vehicles in-service and taking those deviations into account in the calculation of the average specific emissions of CO2 of a manufacturer, determination of the means for collecting excess emissions premiums, publication of performance of manufacturers, adoption of detailed provisions for a procedure to approve the innovative technologies or innovative technology packages, adoption of a detailed procedure for collecting and processing the parameters relating to real-world CO2 emissions and fuel or energy consumption of passenger cars and light commercial vehicles, determination of the procedures for performing the verifications (i) that the CO2 emission and fuel consumption values recorded in the certificates of conformity correspond to the CO2 emissions from, and fuel consumption of, vehicles in-service; and (ii) the presence of any strategies on board or relating to the sampled vehicles that artificially improve the vehicle's performance in the tests performed for the purpose of type-approval, and determination of the correlation parameters necessary in order to reflect any change in the regulatory test procedure for the measurement of specific emissions of CO2. Those powers should be exercised in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council (17).
(53)
In order to amend or supplement, as appropriate, non-essential elements of the provisions of this Regulation, the power to adopt acts in accordance with Article 290 TFEU should be delegated to the Commission in respect of amending data requirements and data parameters set out in Annexes II and III of this Regulation, laying down rules, as regards the interpretation of the eligibility criteria for derogations for certain manufacturers, the content of the applications for a derogation, and the content and assessment of programmes for the reduction of specific emissions of CO2, amending Part A of Annex I of this Regulation for the purpose of setting out the calculation formulae of the derogation targets for niche manufacturers, adjusting the cap for total contribution of innovative technologies to reducing the average specific emissions of CO2 of a manufacturer with effect from 2025 onwards, setting out the guiding principles and criteria for defining the procedures for performing the verifications, establishing the measures for adjustment of M0 and TM0 values, and adapting the formulae for calculating the specific emissions targets to reflect the change in the regulatory test procedure. It is of particular importance that the Commission carry out appropriate consultations during its preparatory work, including at expert level, and that those consultations be conducted in accordance with the principles laid down in the Interinstitutional Agreement of 13 April 2016 on Better Law-Making (18). In particular, to ensure equal participation in the preparation of delegated acts, the European Parliament and the Council receive all documents at the same time as Member States' experts, and their experts systematically have access to meetings of Commission expert groups dealing with the preparation of delegated acts.
(54)
Regulations (EC) No 443/2009 and (EU) No 510/2011 should be repealed with effect from 1 January 2020.
(55)
Since the objectives of this Regulation, namely the establishment of CO2 emissions performance requirements for new passenger cars and new light commercial vehicles, cannot be sufficiently achieved by the Member States, but can rather, by reason of their scale and effects, be better achieved at Union level, the Union may adopt measures, in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity as set out in Article 5 of the Treaty on European Union. In accordance with the principle of proportionality, as set out in that Article, this Regulation does not go beyond what is necessary in order to achieve those objectives,
HAVE ADOPTED THIS REGULATION:
