Article 28
Conformity of production arrangements
1.   An approval authority which grants an EU type-approval shall take the necessary measures to verify, if necessary in cooperation with the approval authorities of the other Member States, that adequate arrangements have been made to ensure that the vehicles, systems, components or separate technical units in production will conform to the approved type.
2.   An approval authority which grants a whole-vehicle type-approval shall take the necessary measures to verify that certificates of conformity issued by the manufacturer conform to Article 33. To that end, the approval authority shall verify that a sufficient number of samples of certificates of conformity conform to Article 33 and that the manufacturer has made adequate arrangements to ensure that the data in the certificates of conformity are correct.
3.   An approval authority which has granted an EU type-approval shall take the necessary measures in relation to that approval to verify, if necessary in cooperation with the approval authorities of the other Member States, that the arrangements referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 continue to be adequate so that vehicles, systems, components or separate technical units in production will continue to conform to the approved type and that certificates of conformity continue to comply with Article 33.
4.   In order to verify that a vehicle, system, component or separate technical unit conforms to the approved type, the approval authority which has granted the EU type-approval may carry out any of the checks or tests, required for the EU type-approval, on samples taken at the premises of the manufacturer, including production facilities.
5.   When an approval authority which has granted an EU type-approval establishes that the arrangements referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 are not being applied, deviate significantly from the arrangements and control plans agreed, have ceased to be applied or are no longer considered to be adequate, even though production is continued, it shall take the necessary measures to ensure that the procedure for conformity of production is followed correctly or shall withdraw the type-approval.
6.   The Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 71 concerning the detailed arrangements with regard to conformity of production. The first such delegated acts shall be adopted by 31 December 2014.
