Article 9
Obligations of manufacturers concerning their products that are not in conformity or that present a serious risk
1.   Manufacturers who consider or have reason to believe that their vehicle, system, component or separate technical unit that has been placed on the market or entered into service is not in conformity with this Regulation or the delegated and implementing acts adopted pursuant to this Regulation shall immediately take the corrective measures necessary to bring that vehicle, system, component or separate technical unit into conformity, to withdraw it or to recall it, as appropriate.
The manufacturer shall immediately inform the approval authority which granted the approval, giving details, in particular, of the non-conformity and of any corrective measures taken.
2.   Where the vehicle, system, component, separate technical unit, part or equipment presents a serious risk, manufacturers shall immediately inform the approval and market surveillance authorities of the Member States in which the vehicle, system, component, separate technical unit, part or equipment was made available on the market or had entered into service to that effect, giving details, in particular, of the non-conformity and any corrective measures taken.
3.   Manufacturers shall keep the information package referred to in Article 24(10) and in addition the vehicle manufacturer shall keep a copy of the certificates of conformity referred to in Article 33 at the disposal of the approval authorities for a period of 10 years after the placing on the market of a vehicle, and for a period of five years after the placing on the market for a system, component or separate technical unit.
4.   Manufacturers shall, following a reasoned request from a national authority, provide that authority through the approval authority with a copy of the EU type-approval certificate or the authorisation referred to in Article 46(1) and (2) demonstrating the conformity of the vehicle, system, component or separate technical unit, in a language which can be easily understood by that authority. Manufacturers shall cooperate with the national authority on any action taken in accordance with Article 20 of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 to eliminate the risks posed by their vehicles, systems, components or separate technical units which have been placed on the market, registered or entered into service.
