Article 66
Operational obligations of technical services
1.   Technical services shall carry out the categories of activities for which they have been designated on behalf of the designating approval authority and in accordance with the assessment and test procedures provided for in this Regulation and the acts listed in Annex I.
Technical services shall supervise or shall themselves carry out the tests required for approval or inspections as set out in this Regulation or in one of the acts listed in Annex I, except where alternative procedures are permitted. The technical services shall not conduct tests, assessments or inspections for which they have not been duly designated by their approval authority.
2.   Technical services shall at all times:
(a)
allow their designating approval authority to witness the technical service during the conformity assessment as appropriate; and
(b)
without prejudice to Article 57(9) and Article 67, provide their designating approval authority such information on their categories of activities falling under the scope of this Regulation as may be requested.
3.   Where a technical service finds that requirements laid down in this Regulation have not been met by a manufacturer, it shall report this to the designating approval authority with a view for the designating approval authority requiring the manufacturer to take appropriate corrective measures and subsequently not to issue a type-approval certificate unless the appropriate corrective measures have been taken to the satisfaction of the approval authority.
4.   Where, in the course of monitoring conformity of production following the issue of a type-approval certificate, a technical service acting on behalf of the designating approval authority finds that a vehicle, system, component or separate technical unit no longer complies with this Regulation, it shall report this to the designating approval authority. The approval authority shall take the appropriate measures as provided for in Article 28.
