Article 43
Compliant vehicles, systems, components or separate technical units that present a serious risk
1.   Where, having performed an evaluation under Article 41(1), a Member State finds that vehicles, systems, components or separate technical units, although they comply with the applicable requirements or are properly marked, present a serious risk to safety or may seriously harm the environment or public health, it shall require the relevant economic operator to take all appropriate measures to ensure that the vehicle, system, component or separate technical unit concerned, when placed on the market, registered or after its entry into service, no longer presents that risk, to withdraw the vehicle, system, component or separate technical unit from the market or to recall it within a reasonable period, commensurate with the nature of the risk. The Member State may refuse to register such vehicles until the vehicle manufacturer has taken all appropriate measures.
2.   For a vehicle, system, component or separate technical unit as referred to in paragraph 1, the economic operator shall ensure that corrective action is taken in respect of all such vehicles, systems, components or separate technical units placed on the market, registered or entered into service in the Union.
3.   The Member State referred to in paragraph 1 shall within one month inform the Commission and the other Member States of all available details, in particular the data necessary for the identification of the vehicle, system, component or separate technical unit concerned, the origin and the supply chain of the vehicle, system, component or separate technical unit, the nature of the risk involved and the nature and duration of the national measures taken.
4.   The Commission shall, without delay, consult the Member States and the relevant economic operator or operators and, in particular, the approval authority that granted the type-approval, and shall evaluate the national measures taken. On the basis of that evaluation, the Commission shall decide whether the national measures referred to in paragraph 1 are considered justified or not and, where necessary, propose appropriate measures.
5.   The Commission shall address its decision to all Member States and shall immediately communicate it to them and the relevant economic operator or operators.
