Article 27
Tests required for EU type-approval
1.   Compliance with the technical prescriptions laid down in this Regulation and in the acts listed in Annex I shall be demonstrated by means of appropriate tests performed by designated technical services.
The test procedures referred to in the first subparagraph and the specific equipment and tools prescribed to perform those tests shall be those laid down in the relevant acts listed in Annex I.
The format of the test report shall comply with the general requirements as laid down by the Commission by means of implementing acts. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 69(2). The first such implementing acts shall be adopted by 31 December 2014.
2.   The manufacturer shall make available to the approval authority as many vehicles, components or separate technical units as are required under the relevant acts listed in Annex I for the performance of the required tests.
3.   The required tests shall be performed on vehicles, components and separate technical units which are representative of the type to be approved.
However, the manufacturer may select, in agreement with the approval authority, a vehicle, system, component or separate technical unit which, while not representative of the type to be approved, combines a number of the most unfavourable features with regard to the required level of performance. Virtual testing methods may be used to aid decision-making during the selection process.
4.   Subject to the agreement of the approval authority, virtual testing methods may be used as alternatives to the test procedures referred to in paragraph 1 at the request of the manufacturer with respect to those requirements established in the delegated acts adopted pursuant to paragraph 6.
5.   Virtual testing methods shall fulfil the conditions set out in the delegated acts adopted pursuant to paragraph 6.
6.   In order to ensure that the results obtained through virtual testing are as meaningful as those obtained through physical testing, the Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 71 concerning the requirements which can be subject to virtual testing and the conditions under which the virtual testing are to be performed. When adopting those delegated acts, the Commission shall take as a basis the requirements and procedures provided for in Annex XVI to Directive 2007/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5 September 2007 establishing a framework for the approval of motor vehicles and their trailers, and of systems, components and separate technical units intended for such vehicles (Framework Directive) (33), as appropriate.
