Article 32
Termination of validity
1.   EU type-approvals shall be issued for an unlimited duration.
2.   An EU type-approval of a vehicle shall become invalid in any of the following cases:
(a)
new requirements applicable to the approved vehicle type become mandatory for the making available on the market, registration, or entry into service of vehicles, and it is not possible to update the type-approval accordingly;
(b)
production of the approved vehicle is definitively discontinued voluntarily;
(c)
the validity of the approval expires by virtue of a restriction in accordance with Article 35(6);
(d)
the approval has been withdrawn in accordance with Article 28(5), Article 44(1) or Article 47(4).
3.   Where only one variant within a type or one version within a variant becomes invalid, the EU type-approval of the vehicle in question shall lose validity only in so far as the particular variant or version is concerned.
4.   When production of a particular type of vehicle is definitively discontinued, the manufacturer shall notify the approval authority that granted the EU type-approval for that vehicle.
Within one month of receiving the notification referred to in the first subparagraph, the approval authority which granted the EU type-approval for the vehicle shall inform the approval authorities of the other Member States accordingly.
5.   Without prejudice to paragraph 4, in cases where an EU type-approval of a vehicle is due to become invalid, the manufacturer shall notify the approval authority that granted the EU type-approval.
The approval authority that granted the EU type-approval shall without delay communicate all relevant information to the approval authorities of the other Member States so as to enable the application, where appropriate, of Article 39.
The communication referred to in the second subparagraph shall specify, in particular, the date of production and the vehicle identification number of the last vehicle produced.
CHAPTER VIII

CERTIFICATE OF CONFORMITY AND MARKINGS

