Article 41
Procedure for dealing with vehicles, systems, components or separate technical units presenting a serious risk at national level
1.   Where the market surveillance authorities of one Member State have taken action pursuant to Article 20 of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008, or where they have sufficient reason to believe that a vehicle, system, component or separate technical unit covered by this Regulation presents a serious risk to the health or safety of persons or to other aspects of the protection of public interests covered by this Regulation, the approval authority that granted the approval shall carry out an evaluation in relation to the vehicle, system, component or separate technical unit concerned covering all the requirements laid down in this Regulation. The relevant economic operators shall cooperate fully with the approval and/or market surveillance authorities.
Where, in the course of that evaluation, the approval authority that granted the approval finds that the vehicle, system, component or separate technical unit does not comply with the requirements laid down in this Regulation, it shall without delay require the relevant economic operator to take all appropriate corrective action to bring the vehicle, system, component or separate technical unit into compliance with those requirements, to withdraw the vehicle, system, component or separate technical unit from the market, or to recall it within a reasonable period, commensurate with the nature of the risk.
Article 21 of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 shall apply to the measures referred to in the second subparagraph of this paragraph.
2.   Where the approval authorities consider that non-conformity is not restricted to their national territory, they shall inform the Commission and the other Member States of the results of the evaluation and the action required of the economic operator.
3.   The economic operator shall ensure that all appropriate corrective action is taken in respect of all non-compliant vehicles, systems, components or separate technical units that it has placed on the market, registered or is responsible for its entry into service in the Union.
4.   Where the economic operator does not take adequate corrective action within the period referred to in the second subparagraph of paragraph 1, the national authorities shall take all appropriate measures to prohibit or restrict the making available on the market, registration or entry into service of non-compliant vehicles, systems, components or separate technical units on their national market, to withdraw them from that market or to recall them.
5.   The national authorities shall, without delay, inform the Commission and the other Member States of the measures provided for in paragraph 4.
The information provided shall include all available details, in particular the data necessary for the identification of the non-compliant vehicle, system, component or separate technical unit, its origin, the nature of the non-conformity alleged and the risk involved, the nature and duration of the national measures taken, and the arguments put forward by the relevant economic operator. In particular, the approval authorities shall indicate whether the non-conformity is due to either of the following:
(a)
failure of the vehicle, system, component or separate technical unit to meet requirements relating to the health or safety of persons, the protection of the environment or to other aspects of the protection of public interests covered by this Regulation;
(b)
shortcomings in the relevant acts listed in Annex I.
6.   Member States shall within one month inform the Commission and the other Member States of any measures adopted and of any additional information at their disposal relating to the non-conformity of the vehicle, system, component or separate technical unit concerned, and, in the event of disagreement with the notified national measure, of their objections.
7.   Where, within one month of receipt of the information referred to in paragraph 6 of this Article, an objection has been raised by either another Member State or the Commission in respect of a measure taken by a Member State, that measure shall be evaluated by the Commission in accordance with Article 42.
8.   Member States shall ensure that appropriate restrictive measures are taken in respect of the vehicle, system, component or separate technical unit concerned, such as withdrawal of the vehicle, system, component or separate technical unit from their market, without delay.
