Article 46
Parts or equipment that may pose a serious risk to the correct functioning of essential systems — related requirements
1.   For the purposes of Article 45(1), the manufacturer of parts or equipment shall submit to the approval authority an application accompanied by a test report drafted by a designated technical service which certifies that the parts or equipment for which authorisation is sought comply with the requirements referred to in Article 45(4). The manufacturer may submit only one application per type of part to only one approval authority.
If so requested by the competent authority of another Member State, the approval authority which has given the authorisation shall, within one month of receiving that request, send to the former a copy of the requested authorisation certificate together with the attachments by means of a common secure electronic exchange system. The copy may also take the form of a secure electronic file.
2.   The application shall include details of the manufacturer of the parts or equipment, the type, identification and part numbers of the parts or equipment, the vehicle manufacturer’s name, type of vehicle and, if appropriate, year of construction or any other information permitting the identification of the vehicle to which the parts or equipment are to be fitted.
When the approval authority is satisfied, taking account of the test report and other evidence, that the parts or equipment in question comply with the requirements referred to in Article 45(4), it shall authorise the parts or equipment to be placed on the market and to be entered into service, subject to the second subparagraph of paragraph 4 of this Article.
The approval authority shall issue a certificate to the manufacturer without delay.
3.   The Commission may adopt implementing acts in order to lay down a template and numbering system for the certificate referred to in the third subparagraph of paragraph 2 of this Article. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 69(2).
4.   The manufacturer shall inform without delay the approval authority that gave the authorisation of any change affecting the conditions under which it was issued. That approval authority shall decide whether the authorisation has to be reviewed or reissued and whether further tests are necessary.
The manufacturer shall be responsible for ensuring that the parts or equipment are produced and continue to be produced under the conditions under which the authorisation was issued.
5.   Before delivering any authorisation, the approval authority shall verify the existence of satisfactory arrangements and procedures for ensuring effective control of the conformity of production.
Where the approval authority finds that the conditions for issuing the authorisation are no longer fulfilled, it shall request the manufacturer to take the necessary measures to ensure that the parts or equipment are brought back into conformity. If necessary, it shall withdraw the authorisation.
6.   Approval authorities from different Member States shall bring any disagreement in relation to the authorisation referred to in the second subparagraph of paragraph 2 to the attention of the Commission. The Commission shall take the appropriate measures in order to resolve the disagreement, including, where necessary, requiring the withdrawal of the authorisation, after having consulted the approval authorities.
7.   Until the list referred to in Article 45(2) has been established, Member States may maintain national provisions dealing with parts or equipment which may affect the correct functioning of systems essential for the safety of the vehicle or its environmental performance.
