Whereas:
(1)
The Treaty of Lisbon modified the legal framework governing the powers conferred on the Commission by the legislator, introducing a distinction between powers delegated to the Commission to adopt non-legislative acts of general application to supplement or amend certain non-essential elements of a legislative act (delegated acts), and the powers conferred on the Commission to adopt acts to ensure uniform conditions for implementing legally binding Union acts (implementing acts).
(2)
Legislative acts adopted before the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon confer powers on the Commission to adopt measures under the regulatory procedure with scrutiny established by Article 5a of Council Decision 1999/468/EC (4).
(3)
Earlier proposals relating to the alignment of legislation referring to the regulatory procedure with scrutiny with the legal framework introduced by the Treaty of Lisbon were withdrawn (5) due to the stagnation of the interinstitutional negotiations.
(4)
The European Parliament, the Council and the Commission subsequently agreed on a new framework for delegated acts in the Interinstitutional Agreement of 13 April 2016 on Better Law-Making (6), and acknowledged the need to align all existing legislation to the legal framework introduced by the Treaty of Lisbon. In particular, they agreed on the need to give high priority to the prompt alignment of all basic acts which still refer to the regulatory procedure with scrutiny. The Commission gave a commitment to prepare a proposal for that alignment by the end of 2016.
(5)
The majority of empowerments in basic acts which provide for the use of the regulatory procedure with scrutiny fulfil the criteria in Article 290(1) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU) and should be adapted to that provision.
(6)
Other empowerments in basic acts which provide for the use of the regulatory procedure with scrutiny fulfil the criteria in Article 291(2) TFEU and should be adapted to that provision.
(7)
Where implementing powers are conferred on the Commission, those powers should be exercised in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council (7).
(8)
In a limited number of basic acts which currently provide for the use of the regulatory procedure with scrutiny the respective empowerments are no longer needed and should therefore be deleted.
(9)
Point 31 of the Interinstitutional Agreement of 13 April 2016 on Better Law-Making states that, on condition that the Commission provides objective justifications based on the substantive link between two or more empowerments contained in a single legislative act, and unless the legislative act provides otherwise, empowerments may be bundled. Consultations in the preparation of delegated acts also serve to indicate which empowerments are considered to be substantially linked. In such cases, any objection by the European Parliament or the Council will indicate clearly to which empowerment it specifically relates. In a limited number of basic acts listed in the Annex to this Regulation, a clear provision concerning adoption of separate delegated acts for different delegated powers has been included in the basic act.
(10)
This Regulation should not affect pending procedures in which the committee has already delivered its opinion in accordance with Article 5a of Decision 1999/468/EC before the entry into force of this Regulation.
(11)
Since the adaptations and amendments to be made concern procedures at Union level only, they do not, in the case of directives, need to be transposed by the Member States.
(12)
The acts concerned should therefore be amended accordingly,
HAVE ADOPTED THIS REGULATION:
