Article 36
Geographical scope of regional coordination centres
1.   By 5 January 2020 the ENTSO for Electricity shall submit to ACER a proposal specifying which transmission system operators, bidding zones, bidding zone borders, capacity calculation regions and outage coordination regions are covered by each of the system operation regions. The proposal shall take into account the grid topology, including the degree of interconnection and of interdependency of the electricity system in terms of flows and the size of the region which shall cover at least one capacity calculation region.
2.   The transmission system operators of a system operation region shall participate in the regional coordination centre established in that region. In exceptional circumstances, where the control area of a transmission system operator is part of various synchronous areas, the transmission system operator may participate in two regional coordination centres. For the bidding zone borders adjacent to system operation regions, the proposal in paragraph 1 shall specify how the coordination between regional coordination centres for those borders is to take place. For the Continental Europe synchronous area, where the activities of two regional coordination centres may overlap in a system operation region, the transmission system operators of that system operation region shall decide to either designate a single regional coordination centre in that region or that the two regional coordination centres carry out some or all of the tasks of regional relevance in the entire system operation region on a rotational basis while other tasks are carried out by a single designated regional coordination centre.
3.   Within three months of receipt of the proposal in paragraph 1, ACER shall either approve the proposal defining the system operation regions or propose amendments. In the latter case, ACER shall consult the ENTSO for Electricity before adopting the amendments. The adopted proposal shall be published on ACER's website.
4.   The relevant transmission system operators may submit a proposal to ACER for the amendment of system operation regions defined pursuant to paragraph 1. The process set out in paragraph 3 shall apply.
