Article 61
Guidelines
1.   The Commission is empowered to adopt binding guidelines in the areas listed in this Article.
2.   The Commission is empowered to adopt guidelines in the areas where such acts could also be developed under the network code procedure pursuant to Article 59(1) and (2). Those guidelines shall be adopted in the form of delegated or implementing acts, depending on the relevant empowerment provided for in this Regulation.
3.   The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 68 supplementing this Regulation by setting out guidelines relating to the inter-transmission system operator compensation mechanism. Those guidelines shall specify, in accordance with the principles set out in Articles 18 and 49:
(a)
details of the procedure for determining which transmission system operators are liable to pay compensation for cross-border flows including as regards the split between the operators of national transmission systems from which cross-border flows originate and the systems where those flows end, in accordance with Article 49(2);
(b)
details of the payment procedure to be followed, including the determination of the first period for which compensation is to be paid, in accordance with the second subparagraph of Article 49(3);
(c)
details of methodologies for determining the cross-border flows hosted for which compensation is to be paid under Article 49, in terms of both quantity and type of flows, and the designation of the magnitudes of such flows as originating or ending in transmission systems of individual Member States, in accordance with Article 49(5);
(d)
details of the methodology for determining the costs and benefits incurred as a result of hosting cross-border flows, in accordance with Article 49(6);
(e)
details of the treatment of electricity flows originating or ending in countries outside the European Economic Area in the context of the inter-transmission system operator compensation mechanism; and
(f)
arrangements for the participation of national systems which are interconnected through direct current lines, in accordance with Article 49.
4.   Where appropriate, the Commission may adopt implementing acts setting out guidelines providing the minimum degree of harmonisation required to achieve the aim of this Regulation. Those guidelines may specify:
(a)
details of rules for the trading of electricity implementing Article 6 of Directive (EU) 2019/944 and Articles 5 to 10, 13 to 17, 35, 36 and 37 of this Regulation;
(b)
details of investment incentive rules for interconnector capacity including locational signals implementing Article 19.
Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 67(2).
5.   The Commission may adopt implementing acts setting out guidelines on operational coordination between transmission system operators at Union level. Those guidelines shall be consistent with and build upon the network codes referred to in Article 59 and shall build upon the adopted specifications referred to in point (i) of Article 30(1). When adopting those guidelines, the Commission shall take into account differing regional and national operational requirements.
Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 67(2).
6.   When adopting or amending guidelines, the Commission shall consult ACER, the ENTSO for Electricity, the EU DSO entity and, where relevant, other stakeholders.
