Article 42
Adoption and review of coordinated actions and recommendations
1.   The transmission system operators in a system operation region shall develop a procedure for the adoption and revision of coordinated actions and recommendations issued by regional coordination centres in accordance with the criteria set out in paragraphs 2, 3, and 4.
2.   Regional coordination centres shall issue coordinated actions to the transmission system operators in respect of the tasks referred to in points (a) and (b) of Article 37(1). Transmission system operators shall implement the coordinated actions except where the implementation of the coordinated actions would result in a violation of the operational security limits defined by each transmission system operator in accordance with the system operation guideline adopted on the basis of Article 18(5) of Regulation (EC) No 714/2009.
Where a transmission system operator decides not to implement a coordinated action for the reasons set out in this paragraph, it shall transparently report the detailed reasons to the regional coordination centre and the transmission system operators of the system operation region without undue delay. In such cases, the regional coordination centre shall assess the impact of that decision on the other transmission system operators of the system operation region and may propose a different set of coordinated actions subject to the procedure set out in paragraph 1.
3.   Regional coordination centres shall issue recommendations to the transmission system operators in relation to the tasks listed in points (c) to (p) of Article 37(1) or assigned in accordance with Article 37(2).
Where a transmission system operator decides to deviate from a recommendation as referred to in paragraph 1, it shall submit a justification for its decision to regional coordination centres and to the other transmission system operators of the system operation region without undue delay.
4.   The review of coordinated actions or a recommendation shall be triggered at the request of one or more of the transmission system operators of the system operation region. Following the review of the coordinated action or recommendation, regional coordination centres shall confirm or modify the measure.
5.   Where a coordinated action is subject to review in accordance with paragraph 4 of this Article, the request for review shall not suspend the coordinated action except where the implementation of the coordinated action would result in a violation of the operational security limits defined by each individual transmission system operator in accordance with the system operation guideline adopted on the basis of Article 18(5) of Regulation (EC) No 714/2009.
6.   Upon the proposal of a Member State or the Commission and following consultation with the Committee established by Article 68 of Directive (EU) 2019/944, the Member States in a system operation region may jointly decide to grant the competence to issue coordinated actions to their regional coordination centre for one or more of the tasks provided for in points (c) to (p) of Article 37(1) of this Regulation.
