Article 51
Certification of transmission system operators
1.   The Commission shall examine any notification of a decision on the certification of a transmission system operator as laid down in Article 52(6) of Directive (EU) 2019/944 as soon as it is received. Within two months of receipt of such notification, the Commission shall deliver its opinion to the relevant regulatory authority as to its compatibility with Article 43 and either Article 52(2) or Article 53 of Directive (EU) 2019/944.
When preparing the opinion referred to in the first subparagraph, the Commission may request ACER to provide its opinion on the regulatory authority's decision. In such a case, the two-month period referred to in the first subparagraph shall be extended by two further months.
In the absence of an opinion by the Commission within the periods referred to in the first and second subparagraphs, the Commission shall be considered not to raise objections to the regulatory authority's decision.
2.   Within two months of receipt of an opinion of the Commission, the regulatory authority shall adopt its final decision regarding the certification of the transmission system operator, taking the utmost account of that opinion. The regulatory authority's decision and the Commission's opinion shall be published together.
3.   At any time during the procedure, regulatory authorities or the Commission may request from a transmission system operator or an undertaking performing any of the functions of generation or supply any information relevant to the fulfilment of their tasks under this Article.
4.   Regulatory authorities and the Commission shall protect the confidentiality of commercially sensitive information.
5.   Where the Commission has received notification of the certification of a transmission system operator under Article 43(9) of Directive (EU) 2019/944, the Commission shall take a decision relating to certification. The regulatory authority shall comply with the Commission decision.
