Article 49
Inter-transmission system operator compensation mechanism
1.   Transmission system operators shall receive compensation for costs incurred as a result of hosting cross-border flows of electricity on their networks.
2.   The compensation referred to in paragraph 1 shall be paid by the operators of national transmission systems from which cross-border flows originate and the systems where those flows end.
3.   Compensation payments shall be made on a regular basis with regard to a given period in the past. Ex-post adjustments of compensation paid shall be made where necessary, to reflect costs actually incurred.
The first period for which compensation payments are to be made shall be determined in the guidelines referred to in Article 61.
4.   The Commission shall adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 68, supplementing this Regulation, establishing the amounts of compensation payments payable.
5.   The magnitude of cross-border flows hosted and the magnitude of cross-border flows designated as originating or ending in national transmission systems shall be determined on the basis of the physical flows of electricity actually measured during a given period.
6.   The costs incurred as a result of hosting cross-border flows shall be established on the basis of the forward-looking long-run average incremental costs, taking into account losses, investment in new infrastructure, and an appropriate proportion of the cost of existing infrastructure, in so far as such infrastructure is used for the transmission of cross-border flows, in particular taking into account the need to guarantee security of supply. When establishing the costs incurred, recognised standard-costing methodologies shall be used. Benefits that a network incurs as a result of hosting cross-border flows shall be taken into account to reduce the compensation received.
7.   For the purpose of the inter-transmission system operator compensation mechanism only, where transmission networks of two or more Member States form part, in whole or in part, of a single control block, the control block as a whole shall be considered as forming part of the transmission network of one of the Member States concerned, in order to avoid flows within control blocks being considered as cross-border flows under point (b) of Article 2(2) and giving rise to compensation payments under paragraph 1 of this Article. The regulatory authorities of the Member States concerned may decide which of the Member States concerned shall be that of which the control block as a whole is to be considered to form part.
