Article 35
Establishment and mission of regional coordination centres
1.   By 5 July 2020, all transmission system operators of a system operation region shall submit a proposal for the establishment of regional coordination centres to the regulatory authorities concerned in accordance with the criteria set out in this Chapter.
The regulatory authorities of the system operation region shall review and approve the proposal.
The proposal shall at least include the following elements:
(a)
the Member State of the prospective seat of the regional coordination centres and the participating transmission system operators;
(b)
the organisational, financial and operational arrangements necessary to ensure the efficient, secure and reliable operation of the interconnected transmission system;
(c)
an implementation plan for the entry into operation of the regional coordination centres;
(d)
the statutes and rules of procedure of the regional coordination centres;
(e)
a description of cooperative processes in accordance with Article 38;
(f)
a description of the arrangements concerning the liability of the regional coordination centres in accordance with Article 47;
(g)
where two regional coordination centres are maintained on a rotational basis in accordance with Article 36(2), a description of the arrangements to provide clear responsibilities to those regional coordination centres and procedures on the execution of their tasks.
2.   Following approval by regulatory authorities of the proposal in paragraph 1, the regional coordination centres shall replace the regional security coordinators established pursuant to the system operation guideline adopted on the basis of Article 18(5) of Regulation (EC) No 714/2009 and shall enter into operation by 1 July 2022.
3.   Regional coordination centres shall have a legal form referred to in Annex II to Directive (EU) 2017/1132 of the European Parliament and of the Council (23).
4.   In performing their tasks under Union law, regional coordination centres shall act independently of individual national interests and independently of the interests of transmission system operators.
5.   Regional coordination centres shall complement the role of transmission system operators by performing the tasks of regional relevance assigned to them in accordance with Article 37. Transmission system operators shall be responsible for managing electricity flows and ensuring a secure, reliable and efficient electricity system in accordance with point (d) of Article 40(1) of Directive (EU) 2019/944.
