Article 17
Allocation of cross-zonal capacity across timeframes
1.   Transmission system operators shall recalculate available cross-zonal capacity at least after day-ahead gate closure times and after intraday cross-zonal gate closure times. Transmission system operators shall allocate the available cross-zonal capacity plus any remaining cross-zonal capacity not previously allocated and any cross-zonal capacity released by physical transmission right holders from previous allocations in the following cross-zonal capacity allocation process.
2.   Transmission system operators shall propose an appropriate structure for the allocation of cross-zonal capacity across timeframes, including day-ahead, intraday and balancing. That allocation structure shall be subject to review by the relevant regulatory authorities. In drawing up their proposal, the transmission system operators shall take into account:
(a)
the characteristics of the markets;
(b)
the operational conditions of the electricity system, such as the implications of netting firmly declared schedules;
(c)
the level of harmonisation of the percentages allocated to different timeframes and the timeframes adopted for the different cross-zonal capacity allocation mechanisms that are already in place.
3.   Where cross-zonal capacity is available after the intraday cross-zonal gate closure time, transmission system operators shall use the cross-zonal capacity for the exchange of balancing energy or for the operation of the imbalance netting process.
4.   Where cross-zonal capacity is allocated for the exchange of balancing capacity or sharing of reserves pursuant to Article 6(8) of this Regulation, transmission system operators shall use the methodologies developed in the guideline on electricity balancing adopted on the basis of Article 6(11) of Regulation (EC) No 714/2009.
5.   Transmission system operators shall not increase the reliability margin calculated pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2015/1222 due to the exchange of balancing capacity or sharing of reserves.
