Article 19
Congestion income
1.   Congestion-management procedures associated with a pre-specified timeframe may generate revenue only in the event of congestion which arises for that timeframe, except in the case of new interconnectors which benefit from an exemption under Article 63 of this Regulation, Article 17 of Regulation (EC) No 714/2009 or Article 7 of Regulation (EC) No 1228/2003. The procedure for the distribution of those revenues shall be subject to review by the regulatory authorities and shall neither distort the allocation process in favour of any party requesting capacity or energy nor provide a disincentive to reduce congestion.
2.   The following objectives shall have priority with the respect to the allocation of any revenues resulting from the allocation of cross-zonal capacity:
(a)
guaranteeing the actual availability of the allocated capacity including firmness compensation; or
(b)
maintaining or increasing cross-zonal capacities through optimisation of the usage of existing interconnectors by means of coordinated remedial actions, where applicable, or covering costs resulting from network investments that are relevant to reduce interconnector congestion.
3.   Where the priority objectives set out in paragraph 2 have been adequately fulfilled, the revenues may be used as income to be taken into account by the regulatory authorities when approving the methodology for calculating network tariffs or fixing network tariffs, or both. The residual revenues shall be placed on a separate internal account line until such a time as it can be spent for the purposes set out in paragraph 2.
4.   The use of revenues in accordance with point (a) or (b) of paragraph 2 shall be subject to a methodology proposed by the transmission system operators after consulting regulatory authorities and relevant stakeholders and after approval by ACER. The transmission system operators shall submit the proposed methodology to ACER by 5 July 2020 and ACER shall decide on the proposed methodology within six months of receiving it.
ACER may request transmission system operators to amend or update the methodology referred to in the first subparagraph. ACER shall decide on the amended or updated methodology not later than six months after its submission.
The methodology shall set out at least the conditions under which the revenues can be used for the purposes referred to in paragraph 2, the conditions under which those revenues may be placed on a separate internal account line for future use for those purposes, and for how long those revenues may be placed on such an account line.
5.   Transmission system operators shall clearly establish, in advance, how any congestion income will be used, and shall report to the regulatory authorities on the actual use of that income. By 1 March each year, the regulatory authorities shall inform ACER and shall publish a report setting out:
(a)
the amount of revenue collected for the 12-month period ending on 31 December of the previous year;
(b)
how that revenue was used pursuant to paragraph 2, including the specific projects the income has been used for, and the amount placed on a separate account line;
(c)
the amount that was used when calculating network tariffs; and
(d)
verification that the amount referred to in point (c) complies with this Regulation and the methodology developed pursuant to paragraphs 3 and 4.
Where some of the congestion revenues are used when calculating network tariffs, the report shall set out how the transmission system operators fulfilled the priority objectives set out in paragraph 2 where applicable.
