Article 59
Establishment of network codes
1.   The Commission is empowered to adopt implementing acts in order to ensure uniform conditions for the implementation of this Regulation by establishing network codes in the following areas:
(a)
network security and reliability rules including rules for technical transmission reserve capacity for operational network security as well as interoperability rules implementing Articles 34 to 47 and Article 57 of this Regulation and Article 40 of Directive (EU) 2019/944, including rules on system states, remedial actions and operational security limits, voltage control and reactive power management, short-circuit current management, power flow management, contingency analysis and handling, protection equipment and schemes, data exchange, compliance, training, operational planning and security analysis, regional operational security coordination, outage coordination, availability plans of relevant assets, adequacy analysis, ancillary services, scheduling, and operational planning data environments;
(b)
capacity-allocation and congestion-management rules implementing Article 6 of Directive (EU) 2019/944 and Article 7 to 10, Articles 13 to 17 and Articles 35 to 37 of this Regulation, including rules on day-ahead, intraday and forward capacity calculation methodologies and processes, grid models, bidding zone configuration, redispatching and countertrading, trading algorithms, single day-ahead and intraday coupling, the firmness of allocated cross-zonal capacity, congestion income distribution, cross-zonal transmission risk hedging, nomination procedures, and capacity allocation and congestion management cost recovery;
(c)
rules implementing Articles 5, 6 and 17 in relation to trading related to technical and operational provision of network access services and system balancing, including rules on network-related reserve power, including functions and responsibilities, platforms for the exchange of balancing energy, gate closure times, requirements for standard and specific balancing products, procurement of balancing services, allocation of cross-zonal capacity for the exchange of balancing services or sharing of reserves, settlement of balancing energy, settlement of exchanges of energy between system operators, imbalance settlement and settlement of balancing capacity, load frequency control, frequency quality defining and target parameters, frequency containment reserves, frequency restoration reserves, replacement reserves, exchange and sharing of reserves, cross-border activation processes of reserves, time-control processes and transparency of information;
(d)
rules implementing Articles 36, 40 and 54 of Directive (EU) 2019/944 in relation to non-discriminatory, transparent provision of non-frequency ancillary services,, including rules on steady state voltage control, inertia, fast reactive current injection, inertia for grid stability, short circuit current, black-start capability and island operation capability;
(e)
rules implementing Article 57 of this Regulation and Articles 17, 31, 32, 36, 40 and 54 of Directive (EU) 2019/944 in relation to demand response, including rules on aggregation, energy storage, and demand curtailment rules.
Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 67(2).
2.   The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 68 supplementing this Regulation with regard to the establishment of network codes in the following areas:
(a)
network connection rules including rules on the connection of transmission-connected demand facilities, transmission-connected distribution facilities and distribution systems, connection of demand units used to provide demand response, requirements for grid connection of generators, requirements for high-voltage direct current grid connection, requirements for direct current-connected power park modules and remote-end high-voltage direct current converter stations, and operational notification procedures for grid connection;
(b)
data exchange, settlement and transparency rules, including in particular rules on transfer capacities for relevant time horizons, estimates and actual values on the allocation and use of transfer capacities, forecast and actual demand of facilities and aggregation thereof including unavailability of facilities, forecast and actual generation of generation units and aggregation thereof including unavailability of units, availability and use of networks, congestion management measures and balancing market data. Rules should include ways in which the information is published, the timing of publication, the entities responsible for handling;
(c)
third-party access rules;
(d)
operational emergency and restauration procedures in an emergency including system defence plans, restoration plans, market interactions, information exchange and communication and tools and facilities;
(e)
sector-specific rules for cyber security aspects of cross-border electricity flows, including rules on common minimum requirements, planning, monitoring, reporting and crisis management.
3.   The Commission shall, after consulting ACER, the ENTSO for Electricity, the EU DSO entity and the other relevant stakeholders, establish a priority list every three years, identifying the areas set out in paragraphs 1 and 2 to be included in the development of network codes.
If the subject matter of the network code is directly related to the operation of the distribution system and not primarily relevant to the transmission system, the Commission may require the EU DSO entity, in cooperation with the ENTSO for Electricity, to convene a drafting committee and submit a proposal for a network code to ACER.
4.   The Commission shall request ACER to submit to it within a reasonable period not exceeding six months of receipt of the Commission's request non-binding framework guidelines setting out clear and objective principles for the development of network codes relating to the areas identified in the priority list (framework guideline). The request of the Commission may include conditions which the framework guideline shall address. Each framework guideline shall contribute to market integration, non-discrimination, effective competition, and the efficient functioning of the market. Upon a reasoned request from ACER, the Commission may extend the period for submitting the guidelines.
5.   ACER shall consult the ENTSO for Electricity, the EU DSO entity, and the other relevant stakeholders in regard to the framework guideline, during a period of no less than two months, in an open and transparent manner.
6.   ACER shall submit a non-binding framework guideline to the Commission where requested to do so under paragraph 4.
7.   If the Commission considers that the framework guideline does not contribute to market integration, non-discrimination, effective competition and the efficient functioning of the market, it may request ACER to review the framework guideline within a reasonable period and resubmit it to the Commission.
8.   If ACER fails to submit or resubmit a framework guideline within the period set by the Commission under paragraph 4 or 7, the Commission shall develop the framework guideline in question.
9.   The Commission shall request the ENTSO for Electricity or, where provided for in the priority list referred to in paragraph 3, the EU DSO entity in cooperation with the ENTSO for Electricity, to submit a proposal for a network code in accordance with the relevant framework guideline, to ACER within a reasonable period, not exceeding 12 months, of receipt of the Commission's request.
10.   The ENTSO for Electricity, or where provided for in the priority list referred to in paragraph 3 the EU DSO entity, in cooperation with the ENTSO for Electricity, shall convene a drafting committee to support it in the network code development process. The drafting committee shall consist of representatives of ACER, the ENTSO for Electricity, where appropriate the EU DSO entity and NEMOs, and a limited number of the main affected stakeholders. The ENTSO for Electricity or where provided for in the priority list pursuant to paragraph 3 the EU DSO entity, in cooperation with the ENTSO for Electricity, shall develop proposals for network codes in the areas referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 where so requested by the Commission in accordance with paragraph 9.
11.   ACER shall revise the proposed network code to ensure that the network code to be adopted complies with the relevant framework guidelines and contributes to market integration, non-discrimination, effective competition, and the efficient functioning of the market and, submit the revised network code to the Commission within six months of receipt of the proposal. In the proposal submitted to the Commission, ACER shall take into account the views provided by all involved parties during the drafting of the proposal led by the ENTSO for Electricity or the EU DSO entity and shall consult the relevant stakeholders on the version to be submitted to the Commission.
12.   Where the ENTSO for Electricity or the EU DSO entity have failed to develop a network code within the period set by the Commission under paragraph 9, the Commission may request ACER to prepare a draft network code on the basis of the relevant framework guideline. ACER may launch a further consultation in the course of preparing a draft network code under this paragraph. ACER shall submit a draft network code prepared under this paragraph to the Commission and may recommend that it be adopted.
13.   The Commission may adopt, on its own initiative, where the ENTSO for Electricity or the EU DSO entity have failed to develop a network code, or ACER has failed to develop a draft network code as referred to in paragraph 12, or upon the proposal of ACER under paragraph 11, one or more network codes in the areas listed in paragraphs 1 and 2.
14.   Where the Commission proposes to adopt a network code on its own initiative, the Commission shall consult ACER, the ENTSO for Electricity and all relevant stakeholders in regard to the draft network code during a period of no less than two months.
15.   This Article shall be without prejudice to the Commission's right to adopt and amend the guidelines as laid down in Article 61. It shall be without prejudice to the possibility for the ENTSO for Electricity to develop non-binding guidance in the areas set out in paragraphs 1 and 2 where such guidance does not relate to areas covered by a request addressed to the ENTSO for Electricity by the Commission. The ENTSO for Electricity shall submit any such guidance to ACER for an opinion and shall duly take that opinion into account.
