Article 51
Transitional provisions
1.   An index provider providing a benchmark on 30 June 2016 shall apply for authorisation or registration in accordance with Article 34 by 1 January 2020.
2.   By 1 January 2020, the competent authority of the Member State where an index provider applying for authorisation in accordance with Article 34 is located shall have the power to decide to register that index provider as an administrator even if it is not a supervised entity, under the following conditions:
(a)
the index provider does not provide a critical benchmark;
(b)
the competent authority is aware, on a reasonable basis, that the index or indices provided by the index provider are not widely used, within the meaning of this Regulation, in the Member State where the index provider is located as well as in other Member States.
The competent authority shall notify ESMA of its decision adopted in accordance with the first subparagraph.
The competent authority shall keep evidence of the reasons for its decision adopted in accordance with the first subparagraph, in such a form that it is possible to fully understand the evaluations of the competent authority that the index or indices provided by the index provider are not widely used, including any market data, judgement or other information, as well as information received from the index provider.
3.   An index provider may continue to provide an existing benchmark which may be used by supervised entities until 1 January 2020 or, where the index provider submits an application for authorisation or registration in accordance with paragraph 1, unless and until such authorisation or registration is refused.
4.   Where an existing benchmark does not meet the requirements of this Regulation, but ceasing or changing that benchmark to fulfil the requirements of this Regulation would result in a force majeure event, frustrate or otherwise breach the terms of any financial contract or financial instrument or the rules of any investment fund, which references that benchmark, the use of the benchmark shall be permitted by the competent authority of the Member State where the index provider is located. No financial instruments, financial contracts, or measurements of the performance of an investment fund shall add a reference to such an existing benchmark after 1 January 2020.
5.   Unless the Commission has adopted an equivalence decision as referred to in Article 30(2) or (3) or unless an administrator has been recognised pursuant to Article 32, or a benchmark has been endorsed pursuant to Article 33, the use in the Union by supervised entities of a benchmark provided by an administrator located in a third country where the benchmark is already used in the Union as a reference for financial instruments, financial contracts, or for measuring the performance of an investment fund, shall be permitted only for such financial instruments, financial contracts and measurements of the performance of an investment fund that already reference the benchmark in the Union on, or which add a reference to such benchmark prior to, 1 January 2020.
6.   The Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 49 concerning measures to determine the conditions on which the relevant competent authority may assess whether the cessation or the changing of an existing benchmark to conform with the requirements of this Regulation could reasonably result in a force majeure event, frustrate or otherwise breach the terms of any financial contract or financial instrument or the rules of any investment fund which references such benchmark.
