Article 13
Certificates
1.   All new and existing passenger ships shall be provided with a Passenger Ship Safety Certificate in compliance with this Directive. The certificate shall have a format as laid down in Annex II. This certificate shall be issued by the Administration of the flag State after an initial survey, as described in point (a) of Article 12(1) and point (a) of Article 12(2), has been carried out.
2.   The Passenger Ship Safety Certificate shall be issued for a period not exceeding 12 months. The period of validity of the certificate may be extended by the Administration of the flag State for a period of grace of up to one month from the date of expiry stated on it. When an extension has been granted, the new period of validity of the certificate shall start from the expiry date of the existing certificate before its extension.
Renewal of the Passenger Ship Safety Certificate shall be issued after a periodical survey, as described in point (b) of Article 12(1) and point (b) of Article 12(2), has been carried out.
3.   For high-speed passenger craft complying with the requirements of the HSC Code, a High Speed Craft Safety Certificate and a Permit to Operate High Speed Craft shall be issued by the Administration of the flag State, in accordance with the provisions of the HSC Code.
For high-speed passenger craft complying with the requirements of the DSC Code, a DSC Construction and Equipment Certificate and a DSC Permit to Operate shall be issued by the Administration of the flag State, in accordance with the provisions of the DSC Code.
Before issuing the Permit to Operate for high-speed passenger craft engaged on domestic voyages in a host State, the Administration of the flag State shall concur with the host State on any operational conditions associated with operation of the craft in that State. Any such conditions shall be shown by the Administration of the flag State on the Permit to Operate.
4.   Exemptions granted to ships or craft under and in accordance with the provisions of Article 9(3) shall be noted on the ship's or the craft's certificate.
