Article 4
Classes of passenger ships
1.   Passenger ships are divided into the following classes according to the sea area in which they operate:
‘Class A’
means a passenger ship engaged on domestic voyages other than voyages covered by Classes B, C and D.
‘Class B’
means a passenger ship engaged on domestic voyages in the course of which it is at no time more than 20 miles from the line of coast, where shipwrecked persons can land, corresponding to the medium tide height.
‘Class C’
means a passenger ship engaged on domestic voyages in sea areas where the probability of exceeding 2,5 metres significant wave height is smaller than 10 % over a one-year period for all-year-round operation, or over a specific restricted period of the year for operation exclusively in such period (e.g. summer period operation), in the course of which it is at no time more than 15 miles from a place of refuge, nor more than 5 miles from the line of coast, where shipwrecked persons can land, corresponding to the medium tide height.
‘Class D’
means a passenger ship engaged on domestic voyages in sea areas where the probability of exceeding 1,5 metres significant wave height is smaller than 10 % over a one-year period for all-year-round operation, or over a specific restricted period of the year for operation exclusively in such period (e.g. summer period operation), in the course of which it is at no time more than 6 miles from a place of refuge, nor more than 3 miles from the line of coast, where shipwrecked persons can land, corresponding to the medium tide height.
2.   Each Member State shall:
(a)
establish, and update when necessary, a list of sea areas under its jurisdiction, delimiting the zones for all-year-round operation and, where appropriate, restricted periodical operation of the classes of ships, using the criteria for classes set out in paragraph 1;
(b)
publish the list in a public database available on the Internet site of the competent maritime authority;
(c)
notify to the Commission the location of such information, and when modifications are made to the list.
3.   For high-speed passenger craft the categories defined in Chapter 1 (1.4.10) and (1.4.11) of the High-Speed Craft Code shall apply.
