Article 9
Additional safety requirements, equivalents, exemptions and safeguard measures
1.   If a Member State or group of Member States considers that the applicable safety requirements should be improved in certain situations due to specific local circumstances and if the need therefor is demonstrated, they may, subject to the procedure laid down in paragraph 4, adopt measures to improve the safety requirements.
2.   A Member State may, subject to the procedure laid down in paragraph 4, adopt measures allowing equivalents for the regulations contained in Annex I, provided that such equivalents are at least as effective as such regulations.
3.   Provided there is no reduction in the level of safety and subject to the procedure laid down in paragraph 4, a Member State may adopt measures to exempt ships from certain specific requirements of this Directive for domestic voyages to be carried out in that State, including in its archipelagic sea areas sheltered from open sea effects, under certain operating conditions, such as smaller significant wave height, restricted year period, voyages only during daylight time or under suitable climatic or weather conditions, or restricted trip duration, or proximity of rescue services.
4.   A Member State which avails itself of the provisions of paragraph 1, 2 or 3 shall proceed in accordance with the second to sixth subparagraphs of this paragraph.
The Member State shall notify the Commission of the measures which it intends to adopt, including particulars to the extent necessary to confirm that the level of safety is adequately maintained.
If, within a period of six months from the notification, it is decided, in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 11(2), that the proposed measures are not justified, the said Member State shall be required to amend or not to adopt the proposed measures.
The adopted measures shall be specified in the relevant national legislation and communicated to the Commission, which shall inform the other Member States of all particulars thereof.
Any such measures shall be applied to all passenger ships of the same Class or to craft when operating under the same specified conditions, without discrimination with regard to their flag or to the nationality or place of establishment of their operator.
The measures referred to in paragraph 3 shall apply only for as long as the ship or craft operates under the specified conditions.
5.   Where a Member State considers that a passenger ship or craft operating on a domestic voyage within that State, notwithstanding the fact that it is complying with the provisions of this Directive, creates a risk of serious danger to safety of life or property, or environment, the operation of that ship or craft may be suspended or additional safety measures may be imposed, until such time as the danger is removed.
In the above circumstances the following procedure shall apply:
(a)
the Member State shall inform the Commission and the other Member States of its decision without delay, giving substantiated reasons therefor;
(b)
the Commission shall examine whether the suspension or the additional measures are justified for reasons of serious danger to safety and to the environment;
(c)
it shall be decided, in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 11(2), whether or not the decision of the Member State to suspend the operation of such ship or craft or to impose the additional measures is justified for reasons of serious danger to safety of life or property, or to the environment, and, if the suspension or the measures are not justified, that the Member State concerned shall be required to withdraw the suspension or the measures.
