Whereas:
(1)
The Commission’s legislative proposals on the common agricultural policy (CAP) beyond 2020 aimed to establish the strong Union framework essential to ensure that the CAP remains a common policy with a level playing field, while also giving Member States greater responsibility as regards how they meet the objectives and achieve the targets set. Accordingly, Member States are to draw up CAP strategic plans and to implement them after their approval by the Commission.
(2)
The legislative procedure regarding the Commission’s legislative proposals on the CAP beyond 2020 has not been concluded in time to allow Member States and the Commission to prepare all elements necessary to apply the new legal framework and the CAP strategic plans as from 1 January 2021, as initially proposed by the Commission. That delay has created uncertainty and risks for farmers in the Union and the entire Union agriculture sector. In order to alleviate that uncertainty and to maintain the vitality of rural areas and regions, as well as to contribute to environmental sustainability, this Regulation should provide for the continued application of the rules of the current CAP framework covering the period 2014 to 2020 (‘current CAP framework’) and for uninterrupted payments to farmers and other beneficiaries, and thus provide predictability and stability during the transitional period in the years 2021 and 2022 (‘transitional period’) until the date of application of the new legal framework covering the period starting on 1 January 2023 (‘new legal framework’).
(3)
Since the legislative procedure regarding the Commission’s legislative proposals on CAP beyond 2020 still needs to be concluded and the CAP strategic plans are still to be developed by Member States, and the stakeholders need to be consulted, the current CAP framework should continue to apply for the additional period of two years. The aim of the transitional period is to facilitate a smooth transition for beneficiaries to a new programming period and to provide for the possibility to take into account the Commission’s Communication of 11 December 2019 on the European Green Deal (‘European Green Deal’).
(4)
In order to ensure that support can be granted to farmers and other beneficiaries from the European Agricultural Guarantee Fund (EAGF) and the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development (EAFRD) in the years 2021 and 2022, the Union should continue to grant such support during the transitional period under the conditions of the current CAP framework. The current CAP framework was established, in particular, by Regulations (EU) No 1303/2013 (4), (EU) No 1305/2013 (5), (EU) No 1306/2013 (6), (EU) No 1307/2013 (7) and (EU) No 1308/2013 (8) of the European Parliament and of the Council.
(5)
This Regulation should provide Member States with sufficient time to prepare their respective CAP strategic plans, as well as facilitate the creation of administrative structures necessary for successful implementation of the new legal framework, in particular by allowing for an increase in technical assistance. All CAP strategic plans should be ready to enter into force once the transitional period ends in order to provide much-needed stability and certainty for the farming sector.
(6)
