Article 13
Harmonised standards and normative documents
1. Member States shall presume conformity with the essential requirements referred to in Annex I and in the relevant instrument-specific Annexes in respect of a measuring instrument that complies with the elements of the national standards implementing the European harmonised standard for that measuring instrument that correspond to those elements of this European harmonised standard the references in respect of which have been published in the Official Journal of the European Union, C series.
Where a measuring instrument complies only in part with the elements of the national standards referred to in the first subparagraph, Member States shall presume conformity with the essential requirements corresponding to the elements of the national standards with which the instrument complies.
Member States shall publish the references to the national standards referred to in the first subparagraph.
2. Member States shall presume conformity with the essential requirements referred to in Annex I and in the relevant instrument-specific Annexes in respect of a measuring instrument that complies with the corresponding parts of the normative documents and lists referred to in Article 16(1)(a), the references in respect of which have been published in the Official Journal of the European Union, C series.
Where a measuring instrument complies only in part with the normative document referred to in the first subparagraph, Member States shall presume conformity with the essential requirements corresponding to the normative elements with which the instrument complies.
Member States shall publish the references of the normative document referred to in the first subparagraph.
3. A manufacturer may choose to use any technical solution that complies with the essential requirements referred to in Annex I and in the relevant instrument-specific Annexes (MI-001 to MI-010). In addition, to benefit from the presumption of conformity, the manufacturer must correctly apply solutions mentioned either in the relevant European harmonised standards, or in the corresponding parts of the normative documents and lists as referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2.
4. Member States shall presume compliance with the appropriate tests mentioned in point (i) of Article 10 if the corresponding test programme has been performed in accordance with the relevant documents mentioned in paragraphs 1 to 3 and if the test results ensure compliance with the essential requirements.

