Article 10
Technical Documentation
1. The technical documentation shall render the design, manufacture and operation of the measuring instrument intelligible and shall permit an assessment of its conformity with the appropriate requirements of this Directive.
2. The technical documentation shall be sufficiently detailed to ensure:
- the definition of the metrological characteristics,
- the reproducibility of the metrological performances of produced instruments when properly adjusted using appropriate intended means, and
- the integrity of the instrument.
3. The technical documentation shall include insofar as relevant for assessment and identification of the type and/or instrument:
(a) a general description of the instrument;
(b) conceptual design and manufacturing drawings and plans of components, sub-assemblies, circuits, etc;
(c) manufacturing procedures to ensure consistent production;
(d) if applicable, a description of the electronic devices with drawings, diagrams, flow diagrams of the logic and general software information explaining their characteristics and operation;
(e) descriptions and explanations necessary for the understanding of paragraphs (b), (c) and (d), including the operation of the instrument;
(f) a list of the standards and/or normative documents referred to in Article 13, applied in full or in part;
(g) descriptions of the solutions adopted to meet the essential requirements where the standards and/or normative documents referred to in Article 13 have not been applied;
(h) results of design calculations, examinations, etc;
(i) the appropriate test results, where necessary, to demonstrate that the type and/or instruments comply with:
- the requirements of this Directive under declared rated operating conditions and under specified environmental disturbances,
- the durability specifications for gas-, water-, heat-meters as well as for liquids other than water.
(j) the EC-type examination certificates or EC design examination certificates in respect of instruments containing parts identical to those in the design.
4. The manufacturer shall specify where seals and markings have been applied.
5. The manufacturer shall indicate the conditions for compatibility with interfaces and sub-assemblies, where relevant.

