Article 64
Budget
1.   Estimates of all the revenue and expenditure of the Agency shall be prepared for each financial year, corresponding to the calendar year, and shall be set out in the budget of the Agency.
2.   Without prejudice to other resources, the revenue of the Agency shall consist of:
(a)
a contribution from the Union and grants from Union bodies;
(b)
any contribution from third countries participating in the work of the Agency, as provided for in Article 75;
(c)
the fees paid by applicants for, and holders of, certificates and authorisations issued by the Agency in accordance with Articles 14, 20 and 21;
(d)
charges for publications, training and any other services provided by the Agency;
(e)
any voluntary financial contribution from Member States, third countries or other entities, provided such contribution is transparent, is clearly identified in the budget and does not compromise the independence and impartiality of the Agency.
3.   The expenditure of the Agency shall include staff, administrative, infrastructure and operational expenses.
4.   Revenue and expenditure shall be kept in balance.
5.   Each year, the Management Board, on the basis of a draft drawn up by the Executive Director in accordance with the principle of activity-based budgeting, shall produce a statement of estimates of revenue and expenditure for the Agency for the following financial year. That statement of estimates, which shall include a draft establishment plan, shall be forwarded by the Management Board to the Commission by 31 January at the latest.
6.   The statement of estimates shall be forwarded by the Commission to the European Parliament and the Council together with the preliminary draft general budget of the Union.
7.   On the basis of the statement of estimates, the Commission shall enter in the preliminary draft general budget of the Union the estimates it considers necessary for the establishment plan and the amount of the contribution to be charged to the general budget, which it shall place before the European Parliament and the Council in accordance with Article 314 TFEU, together with a description of and justification for any difference between the Agency's statement of estimates and the subsidy to be charged to the general budget.
8.   The European Parliament and the Council shall authorise the appropriations for the contribution to the Agency. The European Parliament and the Council shall adopt the establishment plan for the Agency.
9.   The budget shall be adopted by the Management Board, by a two-thirds majority of its members entitled to vote. The budget of the Agency shall become final following final adoption of the general budget of the Union. Where appropriate, it shall be adjusted accordingly.
10.   For any property-related project likely to have significant implications for the budget of the Agency, Article 203 of Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council (25) shall apply.
