Article 25
Examination of draft national rules
1.   The Agency shall, within 2 months of receipt thereof, examine the draft national rules submitted to it in accordance with Article 8(4) of Directive (EU) 2016/798 and Article 14(5) of Directive (EU) 2016/797. If translation is necessary or the draft national rule is long or complex the Agency may extend this time period by up to 3 additional months, subject to the consent of the Member State. However, in exceptional circumstances, the Agency and the Member State concerned may mutually agree to further extend that period.
Within that period, the Agency shall exchange relevant information with the Member State concerned, consult the relevant stakeholders where appropriate, and subsequently inform the Member State of the outcome of the examination.
2.   Where, after the examination referred to in paragraph 1, the Agency considers that the draft national rules enable the essential requirements for railway interoperability to be fulfilled, the CSMs and TSIs in force to be respected and the CSTs to be achieved, and that they would not result in arbitrary discrimination or a disguised restriction on rail transport operations between Member States, the Agency shall inform the Commission and the Member State concerned of its positive assessment. In that case, the Commission may validate the rules in the IT system referred to in Article 27. Where the Agency within 2 months of receipt of the draft national rule or within the extended time period agreed in accordance with paragraph 1 does not inform the Commission and the Member State concerned of its assessment, the Member State may proceed with the introduction of the rule without prejudice to Article 26.
3.   Where the examination referred to in paragraph 1 leads to a negative assessment, the Agency shall inform the Member State concerned and ask it to state its position regarding that assessment. If, following that exchange of views with the Member State concerned, the Agency maintains its negative assessment, the Agency shall within a maximum period of 1 month:
(a)
issue an opinion addressed to the Member State concerned, stating the reasons why the national rule or rules in question should not enter into force and/or be applied; and
(b)
inform the Commission of its negative assessment, stating the reasons why the national rule or rules in question should not enter into force and/or be applied.
This shall not prejudice the right of a Member State to adopt a new national rule in accordance with point (c) of Article 8(3) of Directive (EU) 2016/798 or with point (b) of Article 14(4) of Directive (EU) 2016/797.
4.   The Member State concerned shall inform the Commission of its position on the opinion referred to in paragraph 3 within 2 months, including its reasons in the event of disagreement.
Where the reasons provided are deemed not to be sufficient, or in the absence of such information, and the Member State adopts the national rule in question without paying sufficient heed to the opinion referred to in paragraph 3, the Commission may adopt, by way of implementing acts, a decision addressed to the Member State concerned, requesting it to modify or repeal that rule. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the advisory procedure referred to in Article 81(2).
