Article 55
Establishment and composition of the Boards of Appeal
1.   By decision of the Management Board, the Agency shall establish one or more Boards of Appeal which shall be in charge of the appeals and arbitration procedures referred to in Articles 58 and 61.
2.   Each Board of Appeal shall be composed of a chairperson and two other members. They shall have alternates to represent them in their absence, or where any conflicts of interest arise.
3.   The establishment and composition of Boards of Appeal shall be decided on a case-by-case basis. Alternatively, a Board of Appeal may be established as a permanent body for a maximum period of 4 years. In both cases, the following procedure applies:
(a)
the Commission shall draw up a list of qualified experts based on relevant competence and experience, and following an open selection procedure;
(b)
the Management Board shall appoint the chairperson, the other members and their alternates from the list referred to in point (a). Where the Board of Appeal is not established as a permanent body, the Management Board shall take into account the nature and content of the appeal or arbitration, and avoid any conflict of interest in accordance with Article 57.
4.   Where the Board of Appeal considers that the nature of the appeal so requires, it may request the Management Board to appoint two additional members and their alternates from the list referred to in point (a) of paragraph 3.
5.   On a proposal by the Agency, and after consulting the Management Board, the Commission shall establish the rules of procedure of the Boards of Appeal, including the voting rules the procedures for filing an appeal and the conditions for reimbursement of expenses of their members. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 81(3).
6.   The Boards of Appeal may request the opinion of experts from the Member States concerned, in particular with a view to clarifying the national legislation concerned, during the initial examination phase of the procedure.
