Article 52
Programming document
1.   The Management Board shall adopt the programming document containing annual and multi-annual programmes by 30 November each year, taking into account the opinion of the Commission, and shall forward it to the Member States, the European Parliament, the Council and the Commission and to the networks referred to in Article 38. The annual work programme shall lay down the actions that the Agency is to perform during the coming year.
The Management Board shall establish appropriate procedures to be applied for the adoption of the programming document, including for the consultation of relevant stakeholders.
2.   The programming document shall become definitive after final adoption of the Union general budget and, if necessary, shall be adjusted accordingly.
If, within 15 days of the date of adoption of the programming document, the Commission expresses its disagreement with such document, the Management Board shall re-examine the programme and adopt it, as amended if necessary, within a period of 2 months, in second reading either by a two-thirds majority of its members entitled to vote, including all Commission representatives, or by unanimity of the representatives of the Member States.
3.   The Agency's annual work programme shall identify the objectives of each activity. As a general rule, each activity shall be clearly linked with the budgetary and human resources required to carry it out, in accordance with the principles of activity-based budgeting and management and the early impact-assessment procedure provided for in Article 8(2).
4.   The Management Board shall, if necessary, amend the adopted programming document when a new task is assigned to the Agency. The inclusion of such a new task shall be subject to an analysis of the human and budgetary resources implications in accordance with Article 8(2), and may be subject to a decision to postpone other tasks.
5.   The Agency's multi-annual work programme shall set out overall strategic programming, including objectives, expected results and performance indicators. It shall also set out resource programming, including the multiannual budget and staff. The European Parliament shall be consulted on the draft multi-annual work programme.
The resource programming shall be updated annually. The strategic programming shall be updated where appropriate, in particular to address the outcome of the evaluation and review referred to in Article 82.
