Article 53
Executive Board
1.   The Management Board shall be assisted by an Executive Board.
2.   The Executive Board shall prepare decisions to be adopted by the Management Board. Where necessary, on grounds of urgency, it shall take certain provisional decisions on behalf of the Management Board, in particular on administrative and budgetary matters, subject to a mandate received from the Management Board.
Together with the Management Board, the Executive Board shall ensure adequate follow-up to the findings and recommendations stemming from investigations by OLAF and the various internal or external audit reports and evaluations, including by means of appropriate actions of the Executive Director.
Without prejudice to the responsibilities of the Executive Director, as set out in Article 54, the Executive Board shall assist and advise the Executive Director in the implementation of decisions of the Management Board, with a view to reinforcing supervision of administrative and budgetary management.
3.   The Executive Board shall be composed of the following members:
(a)
the chairperson of the Management Board;
(b)
four of the other representatives of Member States on the Management Board; and
(c)
one of the representatives of the Commission on the Management Board.
The chairperson of the Management Board shall act as the chairperson of the Executive Board.
The four representatives of the Member States, and their alternates, shall be appointed by the Management Board on the basis of their relevant competence and experience. When appointing them, the Management Board shall aim to achieve a balanced gender representation on the Executive Board.
4.   The term of office of members of the Executive Board shall be the same as that of members of the Management Board unless the Management Board decides that it is to be shorter.
5.   The Executive Board shall meet at least once every 3 months and, where possible, not less than 2 weeks prior to the meeting of the Management Board. The chairperson of the Executive Board shall convene additional meetings at the request of its members or of the Management Board.
6.   The Management Board shall lay down the rules of procedure of the Executive Board, shall be periodically informed of the work of the Executive Board, and shall have access to its documents.
