Article 65
Implementation and control of the budget
1.   The Executive Director shall implement the budget of the Agency.
2.   By 1 March following each financial year, the Agency's accounting officer shall communicate the provisional accounts to the Commission's accounting officer together with a report on the budgetary and financial management for that financial year. The Commission's accounting officer shall consolidate the provisional accounts of the institutions and decentralised bodies in accordance with Article 147 of Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012.
3.   By 31 March following each financial year, the Commission's accounting officer shall forward the Agency's provisional accounts to the Court of Auditors, together with a report on the budgetary and financial management for that financial year. The report on the budgetary and financial management for the financial year shall also be forwarded to the European Parliament and the Council.
The Court of Auditors shall examine those accounts in accordance with Article 287 TFEU. It shall publish a report on the Agency's activities every year.
4.   On receipt of the Court of Auditors' observations on the Agency's provisional accounts, pursuant to Article 148 of Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012, the accounting officer shall draw up the Agency's final accounts. The Executive Director shall submit them to the Management Board for its opinion.
5.   The Management Board shall deliver an opinion on the Agency's final accounts.
6.   The accounting officer shall, by 1 July following each financial year, forward the final accounts to the European Parliament, the Council, the Commission and the Court of Auditors, together with the Management Board's opinion.
7.   The final accounts of the Agency shall be published.
8.   The Executive Director shall send the Court of Auditors a reply to its observations by 30 September following each financial year. He or she shall also send that reply to the Management Board and to the Commission.
9.   The Executive Director shall submit to the European Parliament, at the latter's request, all information necessary for the smooth application of the discharge procedure for the financial year in question, in accordance with Article 165(3) of Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012.
10.   The European Parliament, on a recommendation from the Council acting by a qualified majority, shall, before 15 May of year N + 2, give a discharge to the Executive Director in respect of the implementation of the budget for year N.
