Article 33
Monitoring of the performance and decision-making of national safety authorities
1.   In order to perform the tasks entrusted to it and to assist the Commission in fulfilling its duties under the TFEU, the Agency shall monitor the performance and decision-making of national safety authorities through audit and inspections, on behalf of the Commission.
2.   The Agency shall be entitled to audit:
(a)
the capacity of national safety authorities to execute tasks relating to railway safety and interoperability; and
(b)
the effectiveness of the monitoring by national safety authorities of safety management systems of actors as referred to in Article 17 of Directive (EU) 2016/798.
The Management Board shall adopt the policy, working methods, procedures and practical arrangements for the application of this paragraph, including, where appropriate, arrangements regarding consultation with Member States before the publication of information.
The Agency shall promote the inclusion in the audit team of qualified auditors from national safety authorities that are not subject to the actual audit. For that purpose, the Agency shall establish a list of qualified auditors and provide them with training when needed.
3.   The Agency shall issue audit reports and send them to the national safety authority concerned, to the Member State concerned and to the Commission. Each audit report shall include, in particular, a list of any deficiencies identified by the Agency as well as recommendations for improvement.
4.   If the Agency considers that the deficiencies referred to in paragraph 3 prevent the national safety authority concerned from effectively performing its tasks in relation to railway safety and interoperability, the Agency shall recommend to the national safety authority that it take appropriate steps within a mutually agreed time limit, taking into account the seriousness of the deficiency. The Member State concerned shall be kept informed by the Agency about such a recommendation.
5.   Where a national safety authority disagrees with the Agency's recommendations referred to in paragraph 4, or does not take the appropriate steps referred to in paragraph 4, or where no answer is given by a national safety authority in response to the Agency's recommendations within 3 months of receipt thereof, the Agency shall inform the Commission.
6.   The Commission shall inform the Member State concerned of the issue and ask it to state its position regarding the recommendation referred to in paragraph 4. Where the answers provided are deemed not to be sufficient or, where no answer is given by the Member State within 3 months of the Commission's request, the Commission may within 6 months take appropriate action concerning the steps to be taken as a result of the audit, where relevant.
7.   The Agency shall be entitled to conduct pre-announced inspections of national safety authorities, to verify specific areas of their activities and operation, and in particular to review documents, processes and records relating to their tasks as referred to in Directive (EU) 2016/798. The inspections may be conducted on an ad hoc basis or in accordance with a plan developed by the Agency. The duration of an inspection shall not exceed 2 days. The national authorities of the Member States shall facilitate the work of the Agency's staff. The Agency shall provide the Commission, the Member State concerned and the national safety authority concerned with a report on each inspection.
The policy, working methods and procedure for performing the inspections shall be adopted by the Management Board.
