Article 14
Funding of technical provisions
1.   The home Member State shall require every IORP to have at all times sufficient and appropriate assets to cover the technical provisions in respect of the total range of pension schemes operated.
2.   The home Member State may allow an IORP, for a limited period of time, to have insufficient assets to cover the technical provisions. In this case, the competent authorities shall require the IORP to adopt a concrete and realisable recovery plan with a timeline in order to ensure that the requirements of paragraph 1 are met again. The plan shall be subject to the following conditions:
(a)
the IORP shall set up a concrete and realisable plan to re-establish the required amount of assets to cover fully the technical provisions in due time. The plan shall be made available to members or, where applicable, to their representatives and/or shall be subject to approval by the competent authorities of the home Member State;
(b)
in drawing up the plan, account shall be taken of the specific situation of the IORP, in particular the asset/liability structure, risk profile, liquidity plan, the age profile of the members entitled to receive retirement benefits, start-up schemes and schemes changing from non-funding or partial funding to full funding;
(c)
in the event of winding up of a pension scheme during the period referred to in the first sentence of this paragraph, the IORP shall inform the competent authorities of the home Member State. The IORP shall establish a procedure in order to transfer the assets and the corresponding liabilities of that scheme to another IORP, an insurance undertaking or other appropriate body. This procedure shall be disclosed to the competent authorities of the home Member State and a general outline of the procedure shall be made available to members or, where applicable, to their representatives in accordance with the principle of confidentiality.
3.   In the event of cross-border activity, the technical provisions shall at all times be fully funded in respect of the total range of pension schemes operated. If this condition is not met, the competent authority of the home Member State shall promptly intervene and require the IORP to immediately draw up appropriate measures and implement them without delay in a way that members and beneficiaries are adequately protected.
