Article 18
Required solvency margin for the purpose of Article 17(3)
1.   The required solvency margin shall be determined on the basis either of the annual amount of premiums or contributions, or of the average burden of claims for the past three financial years.
2.   The amount of the required solvency margin shall be equal to the higher of the two results as set out in paragraphs 3 and 4.
3.   The premium basis shall be calculated using the higher of gross written premiums or contributions as calculated below, and gross earned premiums or contributions.
The premiums or contributions (inclusive of charges ancillary to premiums or contributions) due in respect of direct business in the previous financial year shall be aggregated.
To that sum there shall be added the amount of premiums accepted for all reinsurance in the previous financial year.
From that sum there shall then be deducted the total amount of premiums or contributions cancelled in the previous financial year, as well as the total amount of taxes and levies pertaining to the premiums or contributions entering into the aggregate.
The amount so obtained shall be divided into two portions, the first extending up to EUR 50 000 000, the second comprising the excess; 18 % of the first portion and 16 % of the second shall be added together.
The sum so obtained shall be multiplied by the ratio existing in respect of the sum of the previous three financial years between the amount of claims remaining to be borne by the IORP after deduction of amounts recoverable under reinsurance and the gross amount of claims. That ratio shall be no less than 50 %.
4.   The claims basis shall be calculated, as follows:
 
The amounts of claims paid in respect of direct business (without any deduction of claims borne by reinsurers and retrocessionaires) in the periods specified in paragraph 1 shall be aggregated.
 
To that sum there shall be added the amount of claims paid in respect of reinsurances or retrocessions accepted during the same periods and the amount of provisions for claims outstanding established at the end of the previous financial year both for direct business and for reinsurance acceptances.
 
From that sum there shall be deducted the amount of recoveries effected during the periods specified in paragraph 1.
 
From the sum then remaining, there shall be deducted the amount of provisions for claims outstanding established at the commencement of the second financial year preceding the last financial year for which there are accounts, both for direct business and for reinsurance acceptances.
 
One third of the amount so obtained shall be divided into two portions, the first extending up to EUR 35 000 000 and the second comprising the excess; 26 % of the first portion and 23 % of the second, shall be added together.
 
The sum so obtained shall be multiplied by the ratio existing in respect of the sum of the previous three financial years between the amount of claims remaining to be borne by the IORP after deduction of amounts recoverable under reinsurance and the gross amount of claims. That ratio shall be no less than 50 %.
5.   Where the required solvency margin as calculated in paragraphs 2 to 4 is lower than the required solvency margin of the preceding year, the required solvency margin shall be at least equal to the required solvency margin of the preceding year, multiplied by the ratio of the amount of the technical provisions for claims outstanding at the end of the previous financial year and the amount of the technical provisions for claims outstanding at the beginning of the previous financial year. In those calculations, technical provisions shall be calculated net of reinsurance but the ratio may be no higher than 1.
