Article 56
Compliance of unmanned aircraft
1.   Taking into account the objectives and the principles set out in Articles 1 and 4, and in particular the nature and risk of the activity concerned, the operational characteristics of the unmanned aircraft concerned and the characteristics of area of operation, a certificate may be required for the design, production, maintenance and operation of unmanned aircraft and their engines, propellers, parts, non-installed equipment and equipment to control them remotely, as well as for the personnel, including remote pilots, and organisations involved in those activities, in accordance with the delegated acts referred to in Article 58 and the implementing acts referred to in Article 57.
2.   The certificate referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article shall be issued upon application, when the applicant has demonstrated that it complies with the delegated acts referred to in Article 58 and the implementing acts referred to in Article 57.
3.   The certificate referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article shall specify the safety-related limitations, operating conditions and privileges. The certificate may be amended to add or remove limitations, conditions and privileges, in accordance with the delegated acts referred to in Article 58 and the implementing acts referred to in Article 57.
4.   The certificate referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article may be limited, suspended or revoked when the holder no longer complies with the conditions, rules and procedures for issuing or maintaining such certificate, in accordance with the delegated acts referred to in Article 58 and the implementing acts referred to in Article 57.
5.   Taking into account the objectives and the principles set out in Articles 1 and 4, and in particular the nature and risk of the activity concerned, the operational characteristics of the unmanned aircraft concerned and the characteristics of area of operation, the delegated acts referred to in Article 58 and the implementing acts referred to in Article 57 may require in respect of the design, production, maintenance and operation of unmanned aircraft and their engines, propellers, parts, non-installed equipment and equipment to control them remotely, as well as of the personnel, including remote pilots, and organisations involved in those activities, a declaration confirming compliance with those delegated and implementing acts.
6.   Where the objectives and the principles set out in Articles 1 and 4 can be achieved without the application of Chapters IV and V of this Regulation, the delegated acts referred to in point (c) of Article 58(1) might provide that those Chapters shall apply neither to the essential requirements referred to in Article 55 nor to the corresponding detailed rules established in accordance with Article 58. In such cases, those essential requirements and those detailed rules shall constitute ‘Community harmonisation legislation’ within the meaning of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council (36) and Decision No 768/2008/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (37).
7.   Member States shall ensure that information about registration of unmanned aircraft and of operators of unmanned aircraft that are subject to a registration requirement in accordance with the implementing acts referred to in Article 57 and point 4 of Annex IX is stored in digital, harmonised, interoperable national registration systems. Member States shall be able to access and exchange that information through the repository referred to in Article 74.
8.   This Section shall be without prejudice to the possibility for Member States to lay down national rules to make subject to certain conditions the operations of unmanned aircraft for reasons falling outside the scope of this Regulation, including public security or protection of privacy and personal data in accordance with the Union law.
