Article 117
Annual and multi-annual programming
1.   By 31 December each year, in accordance with point (c) of Article 98(2), the Management Board shall adopt a programming document containing multi-annual and annual programming, based on a draft put forward by the Executive Director six weeks before its adoption, taking into account the opinion of the Commission and in relation to multi-annual programming after consulting the European Parliament. The Management Board shall forward it to the European Parliament, the Council and the Commission. The programming document shall become definitive after final adoption of the general budget and, if necessary, shall be adjusted accordingly.
2.   The annual work programme shall comprise detailed objectives and expected results including performance indicators and shall take into account the objectives of the European Plan for Aviation Safety. It shall also contain a description of the actions to be financed and an indication of the financial and human resources allocated to each action, in accordance with the principles of activity-based budgeting and management, indicating which activities are to be financed through the regulatory budget and which activities are to be financed through fees and charges received by the Agency. The annual work programme shall be coherent with the multi-annual work programme referred to in paragraph 4 of this Article. It shall clearly indicate tasks that have been added, changed or deleted in comparison with the previous financial year. Annual programming shall include the Agency's strategy concerning its activities related to international cooperation in accordance with Article 90 and the Agency's actions linked to that strategy.
3.   The Management Board shall amend the adopted annual work programme when a new task is given to the Agency. Any substantial amendment to the annual work programme shall be adopted by the same procedure as the initial annual work programme. The Management Board may delegate the power to make non-substantial amendments to the annual work programme to the Executive Director.
4.   The multi-annual work programme shall set out overall strategic programming including objectives, expected results and performance indicators. It shall also set out resource programming including multi-annual budget and staff.
The resource programming shall be updated annually. The strategic programming shall be updated where appropriate, and in particular to address the outcome of the evaluation referred to in Article 124.
