Article 103
Executive Director
1.   The Executive Director shall be engaged as a temporary agent of the Agency under point (a) of Article 2 of the Conditions of Employment of Other Servants.
2.   The Executive Director shall be appointed by the Management Board on grounds of merit and of documented competence and experience relevant for civil aviation, from a list of candidates proposed by the Commission, following an open and transparent selection procedure.
For the purpose of concluding the contract with the Executive Director, the Agency shall be represented by the Chairperson of the Management Board.
Before appointment, the candidate selected by the Management Board shall be invited to make a statement before the competent committee of the European Parliament and to answer questions put by its members.
3.   The term of office of the Executive Director shall be five years. By the end of that period the Commission shall undertake an assessment that takes into account an evaluation of the Executive Director's performance and the Agency's future tasks and challenges. At the midway point, the Executive Director may be invited to make a statement to the competent committee of the European Parliament and answer questions from its members regarding the Executive Director's performance.
4.   The Management Board, acting on a proposal from the Commission that takes into account the assessment referred to in paragraph 3, may extend the term of office of the Executive Director once, for no more than five years. Before extending the term of office of the Executive Director, the Management Board shall inform the European Parliament that it intends to extend the Executive Director's term of office. Within one month before any such extension, the Executive Director may be invited to make a statement before the competent committee of the Parliament and answer questions put by its members.
5.   An Executive Director whose term of office has been extended may not participate in another selection procedure for the same post at the end of the overall period.
6.   The Executive Director may be removed from office only upon a decision of the Management Board acting on a proposal from the Commission.
7.   The Management Board shall reach decisions on appointment, extension of the term of office or removal from office of the Executive Director on the basis of a two-thirds majority of its members with voting rights.
8.   The Executive Director may be assisted by one or more Directors. If the Executive Director is absent or indisposed, one of the Directors shall take his or her place.
