Article 63
Pool of European aviation inspectors
1.   The Agency shall establish, in cooperation with the national competent authorities, a mechanism for the voluntary pooling and sharing of inspectors and other personnel with expertise relevant for the exercise of the certification and oversight tasks under this Regulation.
To that end, the Agency shall, in cooperation with the national competent authorities, define the required qualification and experience profiles on the basis of which those authorities and the Agency shall designate, subject to availability, candidates for participation in the pooling and sharing mechanism in the role of European aviation inspectors.
2.   The Agency and each national competent authority may request assistance from the pool of European aviation inspectors in the performance of oversight and certification activities. The Agency shall coordinate the responses to those requests and develop appropriate procedures for that purpose, in consultation with the national competent authorities.
3.   The European aviation inspectors shall perform their oversight and certification activities under the control, instructions and responsibility of the Agency or the national competent authority that requested their assistance.
4.   The costs of the assistance provided by the European aviation inspectors shall be covered by the authority that requested the assistance.
That authority may decide to finance that assistance by means of fees invoiced and collected on the basis of the rules established in accordance with point (c) of paragraph 6, from the legal or natural person which was subject to the certification and oversight activities performed by those European aviation inspectors.
In that case, that authority shall transfer the amount collected to the authority that provided the assistance.
5.   Any statements, records and reports by European aviation inspectors carrying out their activities in accordance with this Article shall be, in all aspects, treated as equivalent to those of the national inspectors and shall constitute admissible evidence in administrative or judicial proceedings.
6.   As regards the mechanism for the pooling and sharing referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article, the Commission may adopt implementing acts laying down detailed rules with regard to:
(a)
the rules and procedures in accordance with which the Agency and the national competent authorities request, receive or provide assistance through that mechanism;
(b)
the rules and procedures for the authorisations of and the detailed rules applicable to the European aviation inspectors when they are providing such assistance;
(c)
the rules and procedures for the fixing and collection of the fees referred to in paragraph 4 of this Article.
Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 127(3).
