Article 83
Investigations by the Agency
1.   The Agency shall conduct either itself or through national competent authorities or qualified entities the investigations necessary for the performance of its tasks related to certification, oversight and enforcement in accordance with Article 62(2).
2.   For the purposes of conducting the investigations referred to in paragraph 1, the Agency shall be empowered to:
(a)
require the legal or natural persons to whom it has issued a certificate, or who made a declaration to it, to provide the Agency with all necessary information;
(b)
require those persons to provide oral explanations on any fact, document, object, procedure or other subject matter relevant for determining whether the person complies with this Regulation and with the delegated and implementing acts adopted on the basis thereof;
(c)
enter relevant premises, land and means of transport of those persons;
(d)
examine, copy or make extracts from any relevant document, record or data held by or accessible to those persons, irrespective of the medium on which the information in question is stored.
The Agency shall, where required for determining whether a person to whom it has issued a certificate, or who has made a declaration to it, complies with this Regulation and with the delegated and implementing acts adopted on the basis thereof, also be empowered to exercise the powers set out in the first subparagraph in relation to any other legal or natural person who can reasonably be expected to possess or to have access to information relevant for those purposes. The powers of this paragraph shall be exercised in compliance with the national law of the Member State or of the third country where the investigation takes place, with due regard for the rights and legitimate interests of persons concerned and in compliance with the principle of proportionality.
Where in accordance with the applicable national law prior authorisation from the judicial or administrative authority of the Member State or third country concerned is needed to enter relevant premises, land and means of transport as referred to in point (c) of the first subparagraph, those powers shall be exercised only after obtaining such prior authorisation.
3.   The Agency shall ensure that the members of its staff and, where relevant, any other expert participating in the investigation are sufficiently qualified, adequately instructed and duly authorised. Those persons shall exercise their powers upon production of a written authorisation.
4.   Officials of the competent authorities of the Member State in whose territory the investigation is to be conducted shall, at the request of the Agency, assist it in carrying out the investigation. Where such assistance is required, the Agency shall, in good time before the investigation, inform the Member State in whose territory the investigation is to be conducted of the investigation and of the assistance required.
