Article 67
Validity and recognition of certificates and declarations
1.   Certificates issued by the Agency or the national competent authorities, and declarations made by natural and legal persons in accordance with this Regulation and with the delegated and implementing acts adopted on the basis thereof shall be subject exclusively to the rules, conditions and procedures laid down in this Regulation and national administrative requirements and shall be valid and recognised in all Member States, without further requirements or evaluation.
2.   If the Commission considers that a legal or a natural person to which a certificate has been issued or which has made a declaration no longer complies with the applicable requirements of this Regulation or of the delegated and implementing acts adopted on the basis thereof, the Commission shall, based on a recommendation from the Agency, require the Member State responsible for the oversight of that person to take appropriate corrective action and safeguard measures, including limitation or suspension of the certificate. The Commission shall adopt implementing acts containing that decision. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the advisory procedure referred to in Article 127(2). On duly justified imperative grounds of urgency relating to aviation safety, the Commission shall adopt immediately applicable implementing acts in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 127(4).
From the date at which that implementing act takes effect, the certificate or declaration concerned shall, by way of derogation from paragraph 1, no longer be valid and recognised in all Member States.
3.   When the Commission considers that the Member State referred to in paragraph 2 has taken appropriate corrective action and safeguard measures, it shall decide, based on a recommendation from the Agency, that the certificate or declaration concerned shall again be valid and recognised in all Member States, in accordance with paragraph 1.
The Commission shall adopt implementing acts containing that decision. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the advisory procedure referred to in Article 127(2). On duly justified imperative grounds of urgency relating to aviation safety, the Commission shall adopt immediately applicable implementing acts in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 127(4).
4.   This Article shall be without prejudice to Regulation (EC) No 2111/2005.
