Article 70
Safeguard provisions
1.   This Regulation and the delegated acts and implementing acts adopted on the basis thereof shall not prevent a Member State from reacting immediately to a problem relating to civil aviation safety, where all of the following conditions have been met:
(a)
the problem involves a serious risk to aviation safety and immediate action by that Member State is required to address it;
(b)
it is not possible for the Member State to adequately address the problem in compliance with this Regulation and with the delegated acts and implementing acts adopted on the basis thereof;
(c)
the action taken is proportionate to the severity of the problem.
In such a case, the Member State concerned shall immediately notify the Commission, the Agency and the other Member States, through the repository established under Article 74, of the measures taken, their duration and the reasons for taking them.
2.   Once the Agency receives the notification referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article, it shall, without undue delay, assess whether the conditions set out in paragraph 1 of this Article have been met. The results of that assessment shall be included by the Agency in the repository established under Article 74.
Where the Agency considers that those conditions have been met, it shall assess, without undue delay, whether it is able to address the problem identified by the Member State by taking the decisions referred to in the first subparagraph of Article 76(4), thereby obviating the need for the measures taken by the Member State. Where the Agency considers that it can address the problem in that manner, it shall take the appropriate decision to that effect and inform the Member States thereof through the repository established under Article 74. Where it considers that the problem cannot be addressed in that manner, it shall recommend to the Commission that it amends any delegated acts or implementing acts adopted on the basis of this Regulation in the way that it considers necessary in light of the application of paragraph 1 of this Article.
Where the Agency considers that those conditions have not been met it shall issue, without undue delay, a recommendation to the Commission as regards the outcome of that assessment. The Agency shall include that recommendation in the repository established under Article 74.
3.   The Commission shall assess, taking account of the Agency recommendation referred to in the third subparagraph of paragraph 2, whether the conditions set out in paragraph 1 have been met.
4.   Where it considers that those conditions have not been met or where it departs from the outcome of the assessment by the Agency, the Commission shall adopt, without undue delay, implementing acts containing its decision and setting out its findings to that effect. Those implementing acts shall be published in the Official Journal of the European Union and shall be entered by the Agency into the repository established under Article 74.
Upon notification of an implementing act confirming that those conditions have not been met, the Member State concerned shall immediately revoke the measure taken in accordance with paragraph 1.
