Article 120
Budget
1.   Without prejudice to other revenues, the revenues of the Agency shall comprise:
(a)
a contribution from the Union;
(b)
a contribution from any European third country with which the Union has concluded an international agreements as referred to in Article 129;
(c)
the fees paid by applicants for, and holders of, certificates issued by the Agency, and by persons who have registered declarations with the Agency;
(d)
charges for publications, training and any other services provided and for the processing of appeals by the Agency;
(e)
any voluntary financial contribution from Member States, third countries or other entities, provided that such a contribution does not compromise the independence and impartiality of the Agency;
(f)
grants.
2.   The expenditure of the Agency shall include staff, administrative, infrastructure and operational expenditure. In respect of operational expenditure, budgetary commitments for actions which extend over more than one financial year may be broken down over several years into annual instalments, where necessary.
3.   Revenue and expenditure shall be in balance.
4.   Regulatory budgets, the fees set and collected for certification activities and charges levied by the Agency shall be dealt with separately in the Agency's accounts.
5.   The Agency shall, during the financial year, adapt its staff planning and management of activities financed from resources related to fees and charges in a manner that enables it to swiftly respond to work load and fluctuations of those revenues.
6.   Each year, the Executive Director shall draw up a draft statement of estimates of the Agency's revenue and expenditure for the following financial year, including a draft establishment plan, and send it to the Management Board together with explanatory material on the budgetary situation. That draft establishment plan shall, in relation to posts financed from fees and charges, be based on a limited set of indicators approved by the Commission to measure the Agency's workload and efficiency, and shall set out the resources required to meet demands for certification and other activities of the Agency in an efficient and timely manner, including those resulting from reallocations of responsibility in accordance with Articles 64 and 65.
The Management Board shall, on the basis of that draft, adopt a provisional draft estimate of revenue and expenditure of the Agency for the following financial year. The provisional draft estimate of the Agency's revenue and expenditure shall be sent to the Commission by 31 January each year.
7.   The Management Board shall send the final draft estimate of the revenue and expenditure of the Agency, which shall include the draft establishment plan together with the provisional work programme, by 31 March at the latest to the Commission and to the European third countries with which the Union has concluded international agreements as referred to in Article 129.
8.   The Commission shall send the statement of estimates to the European Parliament and the Council together with the draft general budget of the European Union.
9.   On the basis of the statement of estimates, the Commission shall enter in the draft general budget of the European Union the estimates it deems necessary for the establishment plan and the amount of the contribution to be charged to the general budget, which it shall place before the European Parliament and the Council in accordance with Articles 313 and 314 TFEU.
10.   The European Parliament and the Council shall authorise appropriations for the contribution to the Agency and shall adopt the establishment plan of the Agency, taking into account the indicators related to Agency workload and efficiency referred to in paragraph 6.
11.   The budget shall be adopted by the Management Board. It shall become final following final adoption of the general budget of the Union. Where appropriate, it shall be adjusted accordingly.
12.   The Management Board shall, as soon as possible, notify the European Parliament and the Council of its intention to implement any project which may have significant financial implications for the funding of the budget, in particular any projects relating to property, such as the rental or purchase of buildings, and it shall inform the Commission thereof. For any building project likely to have significant implications for the budget of the Agency, Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 1271/2013 (43) shall apply.
Where the European Parliament or the Council has notified its intention to deliver an opinion, it shall forward its opinion to the Management Board within a period of six weeks from the date of notification of the project.
