Article 18
Derogations
1.   By way of derogation from Articles 9 to 13, as appropriate:
(a)
the compliance with the applicable essential requirements referred to in Article 9 of the design of products, of parts and of non-installed equipment may be assessed without the issuance of a certificate, where the delegated acts referred to in point (d)(i) of Article 19(1) so provide. In that case, the delegated acts referred to in point (j) of Article 19(1) are to define the conditions and procedures for such assessment. The delegated acts referred to in point (d)(i) of Article 19(1) might provide that the organisation responsible for the design and production of those products, parts and non-installed equipment is to be allowed to declare the compliance of their design with those essential requirements and with the detailed specifications established in accordance with the delegated acts referred to in point (i) of Article 19(1) adopted to ensure compliance of those designs with those essential requirements;
(b)
when the design of an aircraft does not comply with the essential requirements referred to in Article 9, a restricted type certificate may be issued. In that case, that certificate shall be issued upon application, when the applicant has demonstrated that the design of the aircraft complies with the certification basis established in accordance with the delegated acts referred to in point (b)(i) and (ii) of Article 19(1) and that the design of the aircraft is adequate, as regards airworthiness and environmental compatibility, in light of the intended use of the aircraft.
2.   By way of derogation from Articles 9, 10 and 14, as appropriate:
(a)
in accordance with the delegated acts referred to in Article 19, a restricted certificate of airworthiness or a restricted noise certificate shall be issued for aircraft the design of which has either been subject to a declaration in accordance with point (a) of paragraph 1 or for which a restricted type certificate has been issued in accordance with point (b) of paragraph 1. In that case, those certificates shall be issued upon application, when the applicant has demonstrated that the aircraft conforms to that design and that the aircraft is in condition for safe and environmentally compatible operation;
(b)
in accordance with the delegated acts referred to Article 19, a permit to fly may be issued to allow the operation of an aircraft which does not have a valid certificate of airworthiness or valid restricted certificate of airworthiness. In that case, such a permit to fly shall be issued, upon application, when the applicant has demonstrated that the aircraft is capable of safely performing a basic flight.
The permit to fly may also be issued without such applications, by an organisation approved in accordance with Article 15 which has been granted a privilege to issue those permits to fly in accordance with the delegated acts referred to in point (k) of Article 19(1) or the implementing act referred to in point (e) of Article 17(1), provided that that organisation has determined that the aircraft is capable of performing safely a basic flight.
The permit to fly shall be subject to appropriate limitations, provided for in the delegated acts referred to in point (f) of Article 19(1), and in particular to limitations to protect the safety of third parties.
