Article 84
Fines and periodic penalty payments
1.   The Commission may, at the request of the Agency, impose on a legal or natural person to whom the Agency has issued a certificate, or who has made a declaration to it, in accordance with this Regulation, either one or both of the following:
(a)
a fine, where that person infringed, intentionally or negligently, one of the provisions of this Regulation or of the delegated and implementing acts adopted on the basis thereof;
(b)
a periodic penalty payment where that person continues to infringe one of those provisions, in order to compel that person to comply with those provisions.
2.   The fines and periodic penalty payments referred to in paragraph 1 shall be effective, proportionate and dissuasive. They shall be set taking account of the gravity of the case, and in particular the extent to which safety or protection of the environment has been compromised, the activity to which the infringement pertains and the economic capacity of the legal or natural person concerned.
The amount of the fines shall not exceed 4 % of the annual income or turnover of the legal or natural person concerned. The amount of the periodic penalty shall not exceed 2,5 % of the average daily income or turnover of the legal or natural person concerned.
3.   The Commission shall only impose fines and periodic penalty payments pursuant to paragraph 1 when other measures provided for in this Regulation and in the delegated and implementing acts adopted on the basis thereof to address such infringements are inadequate or disproportionate.
4.   With regard to the imposition of fines and periodic penalty payments in accordance with this Article, the Commission shall adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 128, laying down:
(a)
detailed criteria and a detailed methodology for establishing the amounts of the fines and periodic penalty payments;
(b)
detailed rules for enquiries, associated measures and reporting, as well as decision-making, including provisions on rights of defence, access to file, legal representation, confidentiality and temporary provisions; and
(c)
procedures for the collection of the fines and periodic penalty payments.
5.   The Court of Justice shall have unlimited jurisdiction to review decisions of the Commission taken pursuant to paragraph 1. It may cancel, reduce or increase the fine or periodic penalty payment imposed.
6.   The decisions of the Commission taken pursuant to paragraph 1 shall not be of a criminal law nature.
