Article 69
Qualified entities
1.   The Agency and the national competent authorities may allocate their tasks related to certification and oversight under this Regulation to qualified entities that have been accredited in accordance with the delegated acts referred to in point (f) of Article 62(13) or the implementing acts referred to in point (e) of the first subparagraph of Article 62(14) as being compliant with the criteria set out in Annex VI.
Without prejudice to paragraph 4, the Agency and the national competent authorities which make use of the qualified entities shall establish a system for that accreditation and for the assessment of the compliance of qualified entities with those criteria, both at the moment of accreditation and continuously thereafter.
A qualified entity shall be accredited either individually by the Agency or by a national competent authority, or jointly by two or more national competent authorities or by the Agency and one or more national competent authorities.
2.   The Agency or the national competent authority or authorities, as applicable, shall amend, limit, suspend or revoke the accreditation of a qualified entity that they granted, when that entity no longer complies with the criteria set out in Annex VI.
3.   The Agency or the competent national authority or authorities accrediting a qualified entity may grant it a privilege to issue, renew, amend, limit, suspend and revoke certificates, or to receive declarations, on behalf of the Agency or the national competent authority. That privilege shall be included in the scope of the accreditation.
4.   The Agency and the national competent authorities shall recognise, without further technical requirements or evaluation, accreditations of qualified entities granted by the Agency and by other national competent authorities in accordance with paragraph 1.
However, the Agency and the national competent authorities shall not be obliged to use the full scope of the accreditation granted by another national competent authority or the Agency, nor to use the full scope of the privileges granted to that qualified entity by another national competent authority or the Agency in accordance with paragraph 3.
5.   The Agency and the national competent authorities shall exchange information about the accreditations granted, limited, suspended and revoked, including information about the scope of the accreditation and the privileges granted. The Agency shall make that information available through the repository referred to in Article 74.
