Article 87
Environmental protection
1.   The measures taken by the Agency as regards emissions and noise, for the purpose of the certification of the design of products in accordance with Article 11, shall aim to prevent significant harmful effects on climate, environment and human health caused by the civil aviation products concerned, giving due consideration to the international standards and recommended practices, environmental benefits, technological feasibility and economic impact.
2.   The Commission, the Agency, other Union institutions, bodies, offices and agencies and the Member States shall, within their respective fields of competence, cooperate on environmental matters, including those addressed in Directive 2003/87/CE of the European Parliament and of the Council (38) and Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 with a view to ensuring that interdependencies between climate and environmental protection, human health and other, technical, domains of civil aviation are taken into account, giving due consideration to the international standards and recommended practices, environmental benefits, technological feasibility and economic impact.
3.   The Agency shall, where it has the relevant expertise, assist the Commission with the definition and coordination of civil aviation environmental protection policies and actions, in particular by conducting studies, simulations and providing technical advice while taking into account the interdependencies between climate and environmental protection, human health and other, technical, domains of civil aviation.
4.   In order to inform interested parties and the general public, the Agency shall, at least every three years, publish an environmental review, which shall give an objective account of the state of environmental protection relating to civil aviation in the Union.
When preparing that review, the Agency shall primarily rely on information already available to Union institutions and bodies, as well as on publicly available information.
The Agency shall associate the Member States and consult relevant stakeholders and organisations in the development of that review.
That review shall also contain recommendations aiming to improve the level of environmental protection in the area of civil aviation in the Union.
