Article 24
Training organisations and aero-medical centres
1.   An approval shall be required in respect of aero-medical centres.
2.   An approval shall be required in respect of pilot training organisations and cabin crew training organisations, except for situations in which, as a result of the adoption of implementing acts referred to in point (a) of Article 27(1), taking into account the objectives and principles set out in Articles 1 and 4, and in particular the nature and risk of the activity concerned, such approvals are not required.
3.   The approvals referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article shall be issued upon application, when the applicant has demonstrated that it complies with the implementing acts referred to in Article 27 adopted to ensure compliance with the essential requirements referred to in Article 20.
4.   The approvals referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article shall specify the privileges granted to the organisation. Those approvals may be amended to add or remove privileges, in accordance with the implementing acts referred to in point (a) of Article 27(1).
5.   The approvals referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article may be limited, suspended or revoked when the holder no longer complies with the rules and procedures for issuing and maintaining such approval, in accordance with the implementing acts referred to in point (a) of Article 27(1).
6.   When as a result of the adoption of the implementing acts referred to in point (a) of Article 27(1), taking into account the objectives and principles set out in Articles 1 and 4, and in particular the nature and risk of the activity concerned, an approval referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article is not required in respect of a pilot training organisation or a cabin crew training organisation, implementing acts referred to in point (b) of Article 27(1) may still require the organisation concerned to declare its capability, and the availability to it of the means, to discharge its responsibilities associated with the activities that it performs in compliance with those implementing acts.
