Article 21
Pilots
1.   Pilots shall be required to hold a pilot licence and a pilot medical certificate appropriate to the operation to be performed, except for situations in which, as a result of the adoption of implementing acts referred to in point (c)(i) of Article 23(1), taking into account the objectives and principles set out in Articles 1 and 4, and in particular the nature and risk of the activity concerned, such licences or medical certificates are not required.
2.   The pilot licence referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article shall be issued upon application, when the applicant has demonstrated that he or she complies with the implementing acts referred to in Article 23 adopted to ensure compliance with the essential requirements referred to in Article 20.
3.   The pilot medical certificate referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article shall be issued upon application, when the applicant has demonstrated that he or she complies with the implementing acts referred to in Article 23 adopted to ensure compliance with the essential requirements referred to in Article 20.
4.   The pilot licence and the pilot medical certificate referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article shall specify the privileges granted to the pilot.
The pilot licence and pilot medical certificate may be amended to add or remove privileges, in accordance with the implementing acts referred to in point (c) of Article 23(1).
5.   The pilot licence or the pilot medical certificate referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article may be limited, suspended or revoked when the holder no longer complies with the rules and procedures for issuing and maintaining a licence or a medical certificate in accordance with the implementing acts referred to in point (c) of Article 23(1).
6.   Training and experience on aircraft not subject to this Regulation may be recognised for the purpose of obtaining the pilot licence referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article, in accordance with the implementing acts referred to in point (c)(iv) of Article 23(1).
