Article 64
Reallocation of responsibility upon request of Member States
1.   A Member State may request the Agency to carry out the tasks related to certification, oversight and enforcement referred to in Article 62(2) with respect to any or all natural and legal persons, aircraft, safety related aerodrome equipment, ATM/ANS systems and ATM/ANS constituents, flight simulation training devices and aerodromes for which the Member State concerned is responsible under this Regulation and the delegated and implementing acts adopted on the basis thereof.
Once the Agency accepts such a request, it shall become the competent authority responsible for the tasks covered by that request and the requesting Member State shall be relieved of the responsibility for those tasks.
In relation to the Agency's exercise of that responsibility for those tasks, Chapters IV and V shall apply.
2.   A Member State may request another Member State to carry out the tasks related to certification, oversight and enforcement referred to in Article 62(2) with respect to any or all natural and legal persons, aircraft, safety related aerodrome equipment, ATM/ANS systems and ATM/ANS constituents, flight simulation training devices and aerodromes for which the Member State concerned is responsible under this Regulation and under the delegated and implementing acts adopted on the basis thereof.
Once the Member State accepts such a request, it shall become responsible for the tasks covered by that request and the requesting Member State shall be relieved of the responsibility for those tasks.
In relation to the exercise of the responsibility for the tasks reallocated in accordance with this paragraph, Chapters II and IV and Articles 131 and 132, as well as the applicable provisions of the national law of the accepting Member State, shall apply.
3.   As regards enforcement, the Member State which accepted the request, or the Agency, shall only be responsible for matters related to the procedures leading up to the adoption of decisions by the national competent authority of that Member State, or of the Agency, and pertaining to the certification and oversight tasks reallocated to it in accordance with this Article, as well as to the application of those decisions. For all other matters regarding enforcement, the allocation of responsibilities provided for in this Regulation and in the delegated and implementing acts adopted on the basis thereof shall remain unaffected.
4.   The Agency or a Member State, as applicable, shall only accept the request referred to in paragraph 1 or 2 when the Agency or the national competent authority of the Member State concerned considers that it has the necessary resources and it can effectively exercise the responsibility for the tasks concerned.
5.   When a Member State wishes to apply paragraph 1 or 2, it shall conclude with the Agency or with the other Member State, as applicable, detailed arrangements concerning the reallocation of responsibility for the tasks in question. The natural and legal persons concerned by the reallocation and, in case of the reallocation referred to in paragraph 2, the Agency, shall be consulted on those detailed arrangements before they are finalised. Those detailed arrangements shall, at least, identify clearly the tasks which are being reallocated, and shall include the legal, practical and administrative arrangements necessary to ensure an orderly transfer and the effective and uninterrupted continuation of the performance of the tasks concerned in compliance with this Regulation and with the delegated and implementing acts adopted on the basis thereof, as well as a seamless continuation of the activities undertaken by the natural and legal persons concerned. The detailed arrangements shall also include provisions on the transfer of relevant technical records and documentation.
The Agency and the Member State or Member States concerned, as applicable, shall ensure that the reallocation of the responsibility for the tasks is carried out in accordance with those detailed arrangements.
6.   The Agency shall make available, through the repository established under Article 74, a list of Member States that have applied paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article. That list shall clearly identify the reallocated tasks and the competent authority responsible for the tasks after their reallocation.
The Agency shall take account of the reallocation of the responsibility for the tasks when conducting inspections and other monitoring activities in accordance with Article 85.
7.   The reallocations of responsibility under this Article shall be without prejudice to the rights and obligations of the Member States under the Chicago Convention.
When a Member State reallocates, in accordance with this Article, the responsibility for the tasks which are attributed to it by the Chicago Convention, it shall notify ICAO about the fact that the Agency or another Member State carries out on its behalf the functions and duties ascribed to it under the Chicago Convention.
8.   A Member State which has reallocated the responsibility for the tasks to the Agency or another Member State pursuant to paragraph 1 or 2, may, at any time, decide to revoke the reallocation. In that case, paragraphs 4, 5, 6 and the second subparagraph of paragraph 7 shall apply mutatis mutandis.
