Article 90
International cooperation
1.   The Agency shall, upon request, assist the Commission in its management of relations with third countries and international organisations relating to matters covered by this Regulation. Such assistance shall in particular contribute to the harmonisation of rules, the mutual recognition of certificates, in the interest of European industry, and the promotion of European aviation safety standards.
2.   The Agency may cooperate with the competent authorities of third countries and with international organisations competent in matters covered by this Regulation. To this end, the Agency, in prior consultation with the Commission, may establish working arrangements with those authorities and international organisations. Those working arrangements shall not create legal obligations incumbent on the Union and its Member States.
3.   The Agency shall assist Member States in exercising their rights and fulfilling their obligations under international agreements relating to matters covered by this Regulation, in particular their rights and obligations under the Chicago Convention.
The Agency may act as a Regional Safety Oversight Organisation in the ICAO framework.
4.   The Agency shall, in cooperation with the Commission and the Member States, include and update where necessary, the following information in the repository referred to in Article 74:
(a)
information on the compliance of this Regulation and of the delegated and implementing acts adopted on the basis thereof and of the measures taken by the Agency under this Regulation with the international standards and recommended practices;
(b)
other information related to the implementation of this Regulation, which is common to all Member States and which is relevant for monitoring by ICAO of the compliance of Member States with the Chicago Convention and international standards and recommended practices.
The Member States shall use that information when implementing their obligations under Article 38 of the Chicago Convention and when providing to ICAO information under the ICAO Universal Safety Oversight Audit Programme.
5.   Without prejudice to the relevant Treaty provisions, the Commission, the Agency and the national competent authorities who are involved in ICAO activities shall collaborate, through a network of experts, on technical matters falling within the scope of this Regulation and related to the work of ICAO. The Agency shall provide this network with the necessary administrative support, including assistance for the preparation and organisation of its meetings.
6.   In addition to the tasks set out in paragraphs 1 to 5 of this Article and in Article 75, the Agency may also engage in ad hoc technical cooperation, and research and assistance projects with third countries and international organisations, provided that those activities are compatible with the Agency's tasks and the objectives set out in Article 1.
