Article 115
Procedures for the development of opinions, certification specifications and other detailed specifications, acceptable means of compliance and guidance material
1.   The Management Board shall establish transparent procedures for issuing opinions, certification specifications and other detailed specifications, acceptable means of compliance and guidance material referred to in Article 76(1) and (3). Those procedures shall:
(a)
draw on the expertise of the civil and, where appropriate, military aviation authorities of the Member States;
(b)
whenever necessary, involve experts from relevant interested parties or draw on the expertise of the relevant European standardisation bodies or other specialised bodies;
(c)
ensure that the Agency publishes documents and widely consults interested parties, in accordance with a timetable and a procedure which includes an obligation on the Agency to give a written response to the consultation process.
2.   When the Agency, pursuant to Article 76(1) and (3), develops opinions, certification specifications and other detailed specifications, acceptable means of compliance and guidance material, it shall establish a procedure for the prior consultation of the Member States. To that effect, it may create a working group in which each Member State is entitled to designate an expert. When consultation relating to military aspects is required, the Agency shall, in addition to Member States, consult the European Defence Agency and other competent military experts designated by the Member States. When consultation relating to the possible social impact of those measures of the Agency is required, the Agency shall involve the Union social partners and other relevant stakeholders.
3.   The Agency shall publish the opinions, certification specifications and other detailed specifications, acceptable means of compliance and guidance material developed pursuant to Article 76(1) and (3) and the procedures established pursuant to paragraph 1 of this Article in the official publication of the Agency.
