Article 12
Real-world CO2 emissions and energy consumption
1.   The Commission shall monitor and assess the real-world representativeness of the CO2 emissions and energy consumption values determined within the framework of Regulation (EC) No 595/2009.
Furthermore, the Commission shall regularly collect data on the real-world CO2 emissions and energy consumption of heavy-duty vehicles using on-board fuel and/or energy consumption monitoring devices, starting with new heavy-duty vehicles registered from the date of application of the measures referred to in point (b) of Article 5c of Regulation (EC) No 595/2009.
The Commission shall ensure that the public is informed of how that representativeness evolves over time.
2.   For the purpose of paragraph 1 of this Article, the Commission shall ensure that the following parameters relating to real-world CO2 emissions and energy consumption of heavy-duty vehicles are made available to it at regular intervals, starting from the date of application of the measures referred to in point (b) of Article 5c of Regulation (EC) No 595/2009, by manufacturers, national authorities or through direct data transfer from vehicles, as the case may be:
(a)
vehicle identification number;
(b)
fuel and electric energy consumed;
(c)
total distance travelled;
(d)
payload;
(e)
for externally chargeable hybrid electric heavy-duty vehicles, the fuel and electric energy consumed, and the distance travelled distributed over the different driving modes;
(f)
other parameters necessary to ensure that the obligations set out in paragraph 1 of this Article can be met.
The Commission shall process the data received under the first subparagraph of this paragraph to create an anonymised and aggregated dataset, including per manufacturer, for the purposes of paragraph 1. The vehicle identification numbers shall be used only for the purpose of that data processing and shall not be retained longer than needed for that purpose.
3.   In order to prevent the real-world emissions gap from growing, the Commission shall, not later than two years and five months following the date of application of the measures referred to in point (b) of Article 5c of Regulation (EC) No 595/2009, assess how fuel and energy consumption data may be used to ensure that the vehicle CO2 emission and energy consumption values determined pursuant to that Regulation remain representative of real-world emissions over time for each manufacturer.
The Commission shall monitor and report annually on how the gap referred to in the first subparagraph evolves, and shall, with a view to preventing an increase in that gap, assess, in 2027, the feasibility of a mechanism to adjust the manufacturer’s average specific CO2 emissions as of 2030, and, if appropriate, submit a legislative proposal to put such a mechanism in place.
4.   The Commission shall adopt, by means of implementing acts, the detailed procedure for collecting and processing the data referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 16(2).
