Article 2
Scope
1.   This Regulation shall apply to new heavy-duty vehicles of categories N2 and N3 that meet the following characteristics:
(a)
rigid lorries with an axle configuration of 4×2 and a technically permissible maximum laden mass exceeding 16 tonnes;
(b)
rigid lorries with an axle configuration of 6×2;
(c)
tractors with an axle configuration of 4x2 and a technically permissible maximum laden mass exceeding 16 tonnes; and
(d)
tractors with an axle configuration of 6x2.
It shall also apply, for the purposes of Article 5 of, and point 2.3 of Annex I to, this Regulation, to new heavy-duty vehicles of category N that do not fall within the scope of Regulation (EU) No 510/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council (14) and do not meet the characteristics set out in points (a) to (d) of the first subparagraph.
The vehicle categories referred to in the first and second subparagraphs of this paragraph refer to the vehicle categories as defined in Annex II to Directive 2007/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (15).
2.   The vehicles referred to paragraph 1 shall, for the purposes of this Regulation, be considered as new heavy-duty vehicles in a given 12-month period starting from 1 July, if they are registered in the Union for the first time in that period and have not been previously registered outside the Union.
A previous registration outside the Union made less than three months before registration in the Union shall not be taken into account.
3.   The Commission shall, by means of implementing acts, adopt a specific procedure for identifying heavy-duty vehicles that are certified as vocational vehicles pursuant to Regulation (EC) No 595/2009 and its implementing measures but are not registered as such, and shall apply corrections to the annual average specific CO2 emissions of a manufacturer to take those vehicles into account, starting from the reporting period of the year 2021 and for each subsequent reporting period. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 16(2) of this Regulation.
