Article 12
Report on major hazards for a production installation
1.   Member States shall ensure that the operator prepares a report on major hazards for a production installation, to be submitted pursuant to point (e) of Article 11(1). That report shall contain the information specified in Annex I, Parts 2 and 5 and shall be updated whenever appropriate or when so required by the competent authority.
2.   Member States shall ensure that workers’ representatives are consulted at the relevant stages in the preparation of the report on major hazards for a production installation, and that evidence is provided to this effect in accordance with Annex I, Part 2, point 3.
3.   The report on major hazards for a production installation may be prepared in relation to a group of installations, subject to the agreement of the competent authority.
4.   Where further information is necessary before a report on major hazards can be accepted, Member States shall ensure that the operator provides, at the request of the competent authority, such information and makes any necessary changes to the submitted report on major hazards.
5.   Where modifications are to be made to the production installation that entail a material change, or it is intended to dismantle a fixed production installation, the operator shall prepare an amended report on major hazards, to be submitted pursuant to point (f) of Article 11(1) by a deadline specified by the competent authority, in accordance with Annex I, Part 6.
6.   Member States shall ensure that the planned modifications are not brought into use nor any dismantlement commenced until the competent authority has accepted the amended report on major hazards for the production installation.
7.   The report on major hazards for a production installation shall be subject to a thorough periodic review by the operator at least every five years or earlier when so required by the competent authority. The results of the review shall be notified to the competent authority.
