Article 4
Safety and environmental considerations relating to licences
1.   Member States shall ensure that decisions on granting or transferring licences to carry out offshore oil and gas operations take into account the capability of an applicant for such a licence to meet the requirements for operations within the framework of the licence as required by the relevant provisions of Union law, in particular this Directive.
2.   In particular, when assessing the technical and financial capability of the applicant for a licence, due account shall be taken of the following:
(a)
the risk, the hazards and any other relevant information relating to the licensed area concerned, including, where appropriate, the cost of degradation of the marine environment referred to in point (c) of Article 8(1) of Directive 2008/56/EC;
(b)
the particular stage of offshore oil and gas operations;
(c)
the applicant’s financial capabilities, including any financial security, to cover liabilities potentially deriving from the offshore oil and gas operations in question including liability for potential economic damages where such liability is provided for by national law;
(d)
the available information relating to the safety and environmental performance of the applicant, including in relation to major accidents, as may be appropriate to the operations for which the licence was requested.
Before granting or transferring a licence for offshore oil and gas operations, the licensing authority shall consult, where appropriate, the competent authority.
3.   Member States shall ensure that the licensing authority does not grant a licence unless it is satisfied with evidence from the applicant that the applicant has made or will make adequate provision, on the basis of arrangements to be decided by Member States, to cover liabilities potentially deriving from the applicant’s offshore oil and gas operations. Such provision shall be valid and effective from the start of offshore oil and gas operations. Member State shall require applicants to provide, in an appropriate manner, evidence of technical and financial capacity and any other relevant information relating to the area covered by the licence and the particular stage of offshore oil and gas operations.
Member States shall assess the adequacy of provisions referred to in the first subparagraph in order to establish whether the applicant has sufficient financial resources for the immediate launch and uninterrupted continuation of all measures necessary for effective emergency response and subsequent remediation.
Member States shall facilitate the deployment of sustainable financial instruments and other arrangements to assist applicants for licences in demonstrating their financial capacity pursuant to the first subparagraph.
Member States shall, as a minimum, establish procedures for ensuring prompt and adequate handling of compensation claims including in respect of compensation payments for trans-boundary incidents.
The Member States shall require the licensee to maintain sufficient capacity to meet their financial obligations resulting from liabilities for offshore oil and gas operations.
4.   The licensing authority or the licensee shall appoint the operator. Where the operator is to be appointed by the licensee, the licensing authority shall be notified of the appointment in advance. In such cases, the licensing authority, if necessary in consultation with the competent authority, may object to the appointment of the operator. Where such an objection is raised, the Member States shall require the licensee to appoint a suitable alternative operator or assume the responsibilities of the operator under this Directive.
5.   The licensing procedures for offshore oil and gas operations relating to a given licensed area shall be organised in such a way that information collected as a result of exploration can be considered by the Member State prior to production commencing.
6.   When assessing the technical and financial capabilities of an applicant for a licence, special attention shall be paid to any environmentally sensitive marine and coastal environments, in particular ecosystems which play an important role in mitigation and adaptation to climate change, such as salt marshes and sea grass beds, and marine protected areas, such as special areas of conservation pursuant to the Council Directive 92/43/EEC of 21 May 1992 on the conservation of natural habitats and of wild fauna and flora (21), special protection areas pursuant to the Directive 2009/147/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 November 2009 on the conservation of wild birds (22), and marine protected areas as agreed by the Union or Member States concerned within the framework of any international or regional agreements to which they are a party.
