Article 29
External emergency response plans and emergency preparedness
1.   Member States shall prepare external emergency response plans covering all offshore oil and gas installations or connected infrastructure and potentially affected areas within their jurisdiction. Member States shall specify the role and financial obligation of licensees and operators in the external emergency response plans.
2.   External emergency response plans shall be prepared by the Member State in cooperation with relevant operators and owners and, as appropriate, licensees and the competent authority, and shall take into account the most up to date version of the internal emergency response plans of the existing or planned installations or connected infrastructure in the area covered by the external emergency response plan.
3.   External emergency response plans shall be prepared in accordance with Annex VII, and shall be made available to the Commission, other potentially affected Member States and the public. When making available their external emergency response plans, the Member States shall ensure that disclosed information does not pose risks to the safety and security of offshore oil and gas installations and their operation and does not harm the economic interests of the Member States or the personal safety and well-being of officials of Member States.
4.   Member States shall take suitable measures to achieve a high level of compatibility and interoperability of response equipment and expertise between all Member States in a geographical region, and further afield where appropriate. Member States shall encourage industry to develop response equipment and contracted services that are compatible and interoperable throughout the geographical region.
5.   Member States shall keep records of emergency response equipment and services in accordance with Annex VIII, point 1. Those records shall be available to the other potentially affected Member States and the Commission and, on a reciprocal basis, to neighbouring third countries.
6.   Member States shall ensure that operators and owners regularly test their preparedness to respond effectively to major accidents in close cooperation with the relevant authorities of the Member States.
7.   Member States shall ensure that competent authorities or, where appropriate, contact points develop cooperation scenarios for emergencies. Such scenarios shall be regularly assessed and updated as necessary.
