Article 8
Appointment of the competent authority
1.   Member States shall appoint a competent authority responsible for the following regulatory functions:
(a)
assessing and accepting reports on major hazards, assessing design notifications, and assessing notifications of well operations or combined operations, and other similar documents that are submitted to it;
(b)
overseeing compliance by operators and owners with this Directive, including inspections, investigations and enforcement actions;
(c)
advising other authorities or bodies, including the licensing authority;
(d)
making annual plans pursuant to Article 21;
(e)
producing reports;
(f)
cooperating with the competent authorities or contact points pursuant to Article 27.
2.   Member States shall at all times ensure the independence and objectivity of the competent authority in carrying out its regulatory functions and particularly in respect of points (a), (b) and (c) of paragraph 1. Accordingly, conflicts of interest shall be prevented between, on the one hand, the regulatory functions of the competent authority and, on the other hand, the regulatory functions relating to the economic development of the offshore natural resources and licensing of offshore oil and gas operations within the Member State and the collection and management of revenues from those operations.
3.   In order to achieve the objectives set out in paragraph 2, Member States shall require the regulatory functions of the competent authority to be carried out within an authority that is independent of any of the functions of the Member State relating to the economic development of the offshore natural resources and licensing of offshore oil and gas operations within the Member State and the collection and management of revenues from those operations.
However, where the total number of normally attended installations is below six, the Member State concerned may decide not to apply the first subparagraph. Such a decision shall be without prejudice to its obligations under paragraph 2.
4.   Member States shall make available to the public a description of how the competent authority is organised, including why they have established the competent authority in such a way, and how they have ensured that the regulatory functions set out in paragraph 1 are carried out and that the obligations set out in paragraph 2 are complied with.
5.   Member States shall ensure that the competent authority has adequate human and financial resources to carry out its duties under this Directive. Those resources shall be commensurate with the extent of offshore oil and gas operations of the Member States.
6.   Member States may enter into formal agreements with appropriate Union agencies or other suitable bodies where available for the provision of specialist expertise to support the competent authority in carrying out its regulatory functions. For the purposes of this paragraph a body shall not be deemed suitable where its objectivity may be compromised by conflicts of interest.
7.   Member States may establish mechanisms according to which the financial costs to the competent authority in carrying out its duties under this Directive may be recovered from licensees, operators or owners.
8.   Where the competent authority is comprised of more than one body, Member States shall make every effort to avoid duplication of regulatory functions between the bodies. Member States may designate one of the constituent bodies as the lead body with responsibility for the coordination of the regulatory functions under this Directive and for reporting to the Commission.
9.   Member States shall review the activities of the competent authority and shall take any necessary measures to improve its effectiveness in carrying out the regulatory functions set out in paragraph 1.
