Article 31
Transboundary emergency preparedness and response of Member States with offshore oil and gas operations under their jurisdiction
1.   Where a Member State considers that a major hazard relating to offshore oil and gas operations that are to take place under its jurisdiction is likely to have significant effects on the environment in another Member State, it shall, prior to the commencement of operations, forward the relevant information to the potentially affected Member State and shall endeavour, jointly with that Member State, to adopt measures to prevent damage.
Member States that consider themselves to be potentially affected may request the Member State in whose jurisdiction the offshore oil and gas operation is to take place, to forward all relevant information to them. Those Member States may jointly assess the effectiveness of the measures, without prejudice to the regulatory functions of the competent authority with jurisdiction for the operation concerned under points (a), (b) and (c) of Article 8(1).
2.   The major hazards identified pursuant to paragraph 1 shall be taken into account in internal and external emergency response plans to facilitate joint effective response to a major accident.
3.   Where there is a risk of the foreseeable transboundary effects of major accidents affecting third countries, Member States shall, on a reciprocal basis, make information available to the third countries.
4.   Member States shall coordinate between themselves measures relating to areas outside of the Union in order to prevent potential negative effects of offshore oil and gas operations.
5.   Member States shall regularly test their preparedness to respond effectively to major accidents in cooperation with potentially affected Member States, relevant Union agencies and, on a reciprocal basis, potentially affected third countries. The Commission may contribute to exercises focused on testing transboundary emergency mechanisms.
6.   In the event of a major accident, or of an imminent threat thereof, which has or is capable of having transboundary effects, the Member State under whose jurisdiction the situation occurs shall, without delay, notify the Commission and those Member States or third countries which may be affected by the situation and shall continuously provide information relevant for an effective emergency response.
