Article 11
Documents to be submitted for carrying out offshore oil and gas operations
1.   Member States shall ensure that the operator or the owner submit to the competent authority the following documents:
(a)
the corporate major accident prevention policy or an adequate description thereof, in accordance with Article 19(1) and (5);
(b)
the safety and environmental management system applicable to the installation, or an adequate description thereof, in accordance with Article 19(3) and (5);
(c)
in the case of a planned production installation, a design notification in accordance with the requirements of Annex I, Part 1;
(d)
a description of the scheme of independent verification in accordance with Article 17;
(e)
a report on major hazards, in accordance with Articles 12 and 13;
(f)
in the event of a material change or dismantling of an installation, an amended report on major hazards in accordance with Articles 12 and 13;
(g)
the internal emergency response plan or an adequate description thereof, in accordance with Articles 14 and 28;
(h)
in the case of a well operation, a notification of that well operation and information on that well operation in accordance with Article 15;
(i)
in the case of a combined operation, a notification of combined operations in accordance with Article 16;
(j)
in the case of an existing production installation which is to be moved to a new production location where it is to be operated, a relocation notification in accordance with Annex I, Part 1;
(k)
any other relevant document requested by the competent authority.
2.   The documents to be submitted under points (a), (b), (d) and (g) of paragraph 1 shall be included with the report on major hazards required under point (e) of paragraph 1. The corporate major accident prevention policy of an operator of a well shall, where not previously submitted, be included with the notification of well operations to be submitted under point (h) of paragraph 1.
3.   The design notification required pursuant to point (c) of paragraph 1 shall be submitted to the competent authority by a deadline set by the competent authority before the intended submission of the report on major hazards for the planned operation. The competent authority shall respond to the design notification with comments to be taken into account in the report on major hazards.
4.   Where an existing production installation is to enter or leave the offshore waters of a Member State, the operator shall notify the competent authority in writing prior to the date on which the production installation is due to enter or leave the offshore waters of the Member State.
5.   The relocation notification required pursuant to point (j) of paragraph 1 shall be submitted to the competent authority at a stage that is sufficiently early in the proposed development to enable the operator to take into account any matters raised by the competent authority during the preparation of the report on major hazards.
6.   Where there is a material change affecting the design notification or the relocation notification prior to the submission of the report on major hazards, the competent authority shall be notified of that change as soon as possible.
7.   The report on major hazards required pursuant to point (e) of paragraph 1 shall be submitted to the competent authority by a deadline set by the competent authority that is before the planned commencement of the operations.
