Article 13
Report on major hazards for a non-production installation
1.   Member States shall ensure that the owner prepares a report on major hazards for a non-production installation, to be submitted pursuant to point (e) of Article 11(1). That report shall contain the information specified in Annex I, Parts 3 and 5 and shall be updated whenever appropriate or when so required by the competent authority.
2.   Member States shall ensure that workers’ representatives are consulted at the relevant stages in the preparation of the report on major hazards for a non-production installation, and that evidence is provided to this effect in accordance with Annex I, Part 3, point 2.
3.   Where further information is necessary before a report on major hazards for a non-production installation can be accepted, Member States shall require the owner to provide, at the request of the competent authority, such information and to make any necessary changes to the submitted report on major hazards.
4.   Where modifications are to be made to the non-production installation that entail a material change, or it is intended to dismantle a fixed non-production installation, the owner shall prepare an amended report on major hazards, to be submitted pursuant to point (f) of Article 11(1) by a deadline specified by the competent authority, in accordance with Annex I, Part 6, points 1, 2 and 3.
5.   For a fixed non-production installation, Member States shall ensure that the planned modifications are not brought into use nor any dismantlement commenced until the competent authority has accepted the amended report on major hazards for the fixed non-production installation.
6.   For a mobile non-production installation, Member States shall ensure that the planned modifications are not brought into use until the competent authority has accepted the amended report on major hazards for the mobile non-production installation.
7.   The report on major hazards for a non-production installation shall be subject to a thorough periodic review by the owner at least every five years or earlier when so required by the competent authority. The results of the review shall be notified to the competent authority.
