Article 5
Calculation of cost-optimal levels of minimum energy performance requirements
1.   The Commission shall establish by means of delegated acts in accordance with Articles 23, 24 and 25 by 30 June 2011 a comparative methodology framework for calculating cost-optimal levels of minimum energy performance requirements for buildings and building elements.
The comparative methodology framework shall be established in accordance with Annex III and shall differentiate between new and existing buildings and between different categories of buildings.
2.   Member States shall calculate cost-optimal levels of minimum energy performance requirements using the comparative methodology framework established in accordance with paragraph 1 and relevant parameters, such as climatic conditions and the practical accessibility of energy infrastructure, and compare the results of this calculation with the minimum energy performance requirements in force.
Member States shall report to the Commission all input data and assumptions used for those calculations and the results of those calculations. The report may be included in the Energy Efficiency Action Plans referred to in Article 14(2) of Directive 2006/32/EC. Member States shall submit those reports to the Commission at regular intervals, which shall not be longer than five years. The first report shall be submitted by 30 June 2012.
3.   If the result of the comparison performed in accordance with paragraph 2 shows that the minimum energy performance requirements in force are significantly less energy efficient than cost-optimal levels of minimum energy performance requirements, the Member State concerned shall justify this difference in writing to the Commission in the report referred to in paragraph 2, accompanied, to the extent that the gap cannot be justified, by a plan outlining appropriate steps to significantly reduce the gap by the next review of the energy performance requirements as referred to in Article 4(1).
4.   The Commission shall publish a report on the progress of the Member States in reaching cost-optimal levels of minimum energy performance requirements.
