Article 20
Information
1.   Member States shall take the necessary measures to inform the owners or tenants of buildings or building units of the different methods and practices that serve to enhance energy performance.
2.   Member States shall in particular provide information to the owners or tenants of buildings on energy performance certificates and inspection reports, their purpose and objectives, on cost-effective ways to improve the energy performance of the building and, where appropriate, on financial instruments available to improve the energy performance of the building.
At the request of the Member States, the Commission shall assist Member States in staging information campaigns for the purposes of paragraph 1 and the first subparagraph of this paragraph, which may be dealt with in Union programmes.
3.   Member States shall ensure that guidance and training are made available for those responsible for implementing this Directive. Such guidance and training shall address the importance of improving energy performance, and shall enable consideration of the optimal combination of improvements in energy efficiency, use of energy from renewable sources and use of district heating and cooling when planning, designing, building and renovating industrial or residential areas.
4.   The Commission is invited to continuously improve its information services, in particular the website that has been set up as a European portal for energy efficiency in buildings directed towards citizens, professionals and authorities, in order to assist Member States in their information and awareness-raising efforts. Information displayed on this website might include links to relevant European Union and national, regional and local legislation, links to Europa websites that display the National Energy Efficiency Action Plans, links to available financial instruments, as well as best practice examples at national, regional and local level. In the context of the European Regional Development Fund, the Commission shall continue and further intensify its information services with the aim of facilitating the use of available funds by providing assistance and information to interested stakeholders, including national, regional and local authorities, on funding possibilities, taking into account the latest changes in the regulatory framework.
