Article 10
Financial incentives and market barriers
1.   In view of the importance of providing appropriate financing and other instruments to catalyse the energy performance of buildings and the transition to nearly zero-energy buildings, Member States shall take appropriate steps to consider the most relevant such instruments in the light of national circumstances.
2.   Member States shall draw up, by 30 June 2011, a list of existing and, if appropriate, proposed measures and instruments including those of a financial nature, other than those required by this Directive, which promote the objectives of this Directive.
Member States shall update this list every three years. Member States shall communicate these lists to the Commission, which they may do by including them in the Energy Efficiency Action Plans referred to in Article 14(2) of Directive 2006/32/EC.
3.   The Commission shall examine the effectiveness of the listed existing and proposed measures referred to in paragraph 2 as well as of relevant Union instruments, in supporting the implementation of this Directive. On the basis of that examination, and taking due account of the principle of subsidiarity, the Commission may provide advice or recommendations as regards specific national schemes and coordination with Union and international financial institutions. The Commission may include its examination and possible advice or recommendations in its report on the National Energy Efficiency Plans referred to in Article 14(5) of Directive 2006/32/EC.
4.   The Commission shall, where appropriate, assist upon request Member States in setting up national or regional financial support programmes with the aim of increasing energy efficiency in buildings, especially of existing buildings, by supporting the exchange of best practice between the responsible national or regional authorities or bodies.
5.   In order to improve financing in support of the implementation of this Directive and taking due account of the principle of subsidiarity, the Commission shall, preferably by 2011, present an analysis on, in particular:
(a)
the effectiveness, the appropriateness of the level, and the actual amount used, of structural funds and framework programmes that were used for increasing energy efficiency in buildings, especially in housing;
(b)
the effectiveness of the use of funds from the EIB and other public finance institutions;
(c)
the coordination of Union and national funding and other forms of support that can act as a leverage for stimulating investments in energy efficiency and the adequacy of such funds for achieving Union objectives.
On the basis of that analysis, and in accordance with the multiannual financial framework, the Commission may subsequently submit, if it considers this appropriate, proposals with respect to Union instruments to the European Parliament and the Council.
6.   Member States shall take account of the cost-optimal levels of energy performance when providing incentives for the construction or major renovation of buildings.
7.   The provisions of this Directive shall not prevent Member States from providing incentives for new buildings, renovations or building elements which go beyond the cost-optimal levels.
