Article 14
Inspection of heating systems
1.   Member States shall lay down the necessary measures to establish a regular inspection of the accessible parts of systems used for heating buildings, such as the heat generator, control system and circulation pump(s), with boilers of an effective rated output for space heating purposes of more than 20 kW. That inspection shall include an assessment of the boiler efficiency and the boiler sizing compared with the heating requirements of the building. The assessment of the boiler sizing does not have to be repeated as long as no changes were made to the heating system or as regards the heating requirements of the building in the meantime.
Member States may reduce the frequency of such inspections or lighten them as appropriate, where an electronic monitoring and control system is in place.
2.   Member States may set different inspection frequencies depending on the type and effective rated output of the heating system whilst taking into account the costs of the inspection of the heating system and the estimated energy cost savings that may result from the inspection.
3.   Heating systems with boilers of an effective rated output of more than 100 kW shall be inspected at least every two years.
For gas boilers, this period may be extended to four years.
4.   As an alternative to paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 Member States may opt to take measures to ensure the provision of advice to users concerning the replacement of boilers, other modifications to the heating system and alternative solutions to assess the efficiency and appropriate size of the boiler. The overall impact of this approach shall be equivalent to that arising from the provisions set out in paragraphs 1, 2 and 3.
Where Member States choose to apply the measures referred to in the first subparagraph, they shall submit to the Commission a report on the equivalence of those measures to measures referred to in paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of this Article by 30 June 2011 at the latest. Member States shall submit these reports to the Commission every three years. The reports may be included in the Energy Efficiency Action Plans referred to in Article 14(2) of Directive 2006/32/EC.
5.   After receiving the national report from a Member State about the application of the option as described in paragraph 4, the Commission may request further specific information regarding the requirements and equivalence of the measures set out in that paragraph. In that case, the Member State concerned shall present the requested information or propose amendments within nine months.
