Article 9
Nearly zero-energy buildings
1.   Member States shall ensure that:
(a)
by 31 December 2020, all new buildings are nearly zero-energy buildings; and
(b)
after 31 December 2018, new buildings occupied and owned by public authorities are nearly zero-energy buildings.
Member States shall draw up national plans for increasing the number of nearly zero-energy buildings. These national plans may include targets differentiated according to the category of building.
2.   Member States shall furthermore, following the leading example of the public sector, develop policies and take measures such as the setting of targets in order to stimulate the transformation of buildings that are refurbished into nearly zero-energy buildings, and inform the Commission thereof in their national plans referred to in paragraph 1.
3.   The national plans shall include, inter alia, the following elements:
(a)
the Member State’s detailed application in practice of the definition of nearly zero-energy buildings, reflecting their national, regional or local conditions, and including a numerical indicator of primary energy use expressed in kWh/m2 per year. Primary energy factors used for the determination of the primary energy use may be based on national or regional yearly average values and may take into account relevant European standards;
(b)
intermediate targets for improving the energy performance of new buildings, by 2015, with a view to preparing the implementation of paragraph 1;
(c)
information on the policies and financial or other measures adopted in the context of paragraphs 1 and 2 for the promotion of nearly zero-energy buildings, including details of national requirements and measures concerning the use of energy from renewable sources in new buildings and existing buildings undergoing major renovation in the context of Article 13(4) of Directive 2009/28/EC and Articles 6 and 7 of this Directive.
4.   The Commission shall evaluate the national plans referred to in paragraph 1, notably the adequacy of the measures envisaged by the Member State in relation to the objectives of this Directive. The Commission, taking due account of the principle of subsidiarity, may request further specific information regarding the requirements set out in paragraphs 1, 2 and 3. In that case, the Member State concerned shall submit the requested information or propose amendments within nine months following the request from the Commission. Following its evaluation, the Commission may issue a recommendation.
5.   The Commission shall by 31 December 2012 and every three years thereafter publish a report on the progress of Member States in increasing the number of nearly zero-energy buildings. On the basis of that report the Commission shall develop an action plan and, if necessary, propose measures to increase the number of those buildings and encourage best practices as regards the cost-effective transformation of existing buildings into nearly zero-energy buildings.
6.   Member States may decide not to apply the requirements set out in points (a) and (b) of paragraph 1 in specific and justifiable cases where the cost-benefit analysis over the economic lifecycle of the building in question is negative. Member States shall inform the Commission of the principles of the relevant legislative regimes.
