Article 17
Eligibility
1.   Within the scope set out in Article 3 and in pursuit of the objectives set out in Article 4, Member States shall prepare national recovery and resilience plans. Those plans shall set out the reform and investment agenda of the Member State concerned. Recovery and resilience plans that are eligible for financing under the Facility shall comprise measures for the implementation of reforms and public investment through a comprehensive and coherent package, which may also include public schemes that aim to incentivise private investment.
2.   Measures started from 1 February 2020 onwards shall be eligible provided that they comply with the requirements set out in this Regulation.
3.   The recovery and resilience plans shall be consistent with the relevant country-specific challenges and priorities identified in the context of the European Semester, as well as those identified in the most recent Council recommendation on the economic policy of the euro area for Member States whose currency is the euro. The recovery and resilience plans shall also be consistent with the information included by the Member States in the National Reform Programmes under the European Semester, in their National Energy and Climate Plans and updates thereof under Regulation (EU) 2018/1999, in the territorial just transition plans under a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing the Just Transition Fund (the ‘Just Transition Fund Regulation’), in the Youth Guarantee implementation plans and in the partnership agreements and operational programmes under the Union funds.
4.   The recovery and resilience plans shall respect the horizontal principles set out in Article 5.
5.   Where a Member State is exempt from the monitoring and assessment in the context of the European Semester on the basis of Article 12 of Regulation (EU) No 472/2013, or is subject to surveillance under Regulation (EC) No 332/2002, this Regulation shall apply to the Member State concerned in relation to the challenges and priorities identified by the measures set out in those Regulations.
