Article 20
Commission proposal and Council implementing decision
1.   On a proposal from the Commission, the Council shall approve by means of an implementing decision the assessment of the recovery and resilience plan submitted by the Member State in accordance with Article 18(1) or, where applicable, of its update submitted in accordance with Article 18(2).
2.   In the event that the Commission gives a positive assessment to a recovery and resilience plan, the Commission proposal for a Council implementing decision shall set out the reforms and investment projects to be implemented by the Member State, including the milestones and targets, and the financial contributions calculated in accordance with Article 11.
3.   Where the Member State concerned requests loan support, the Commission proposal for a Council implementing decision shall also set out the amount of the loan support as referred to in Article 14(4) and (6) and the additional reforms and investment projects to be implemented by the Member State covered by that loan, including the additional milestones and targets.
4.   The financial contribution referred to in paragraph 2 shall be determined on the basis of the estimated total costs of the recovery and resilience plan proposed by the Member State concerned, as assessed under the criteria set out in Article 19(3). The amount of financial contribution shall be set as follows:
(a)
where the recovery and resilience plan complies satisfactorily with the criteria set out in Article 19(3), and the amount of the estimated total costs of the recovery and resilience plan is equal to, or higher than, the maximum financial contribution calculated for that Member State in accordance with Article 11, the financial contribution allocated to the Member State concerned shall be equal to the total amount of the maximum financial contribution calculated for that Member State in accordance with Article 11;
(b)
where the recovery and resilience plan complies satisfactorily with the criteria set out in Article 19(3), and the amount of the estimated total costs of the recovery and resilience plan is lower than the maximum financial contribution calculated for that Member State in accordance with Article 11, the financial contribution allocated to the Member State shall be equal to the amount of the estimated total costs of the recovery and resilience plan;
(c)
where the recovery and resilience plan does not comply satisfactorily with the criteria set out in Article 19(3), no financial contribution shall be allocated to the Member State concerned.
5.   The Commission proposal referred to in paragraph 2 shall also lay down:
(a)
the financial contribution to be paid in instalments once the Member State has satisfactorily fulfilled the relevant milestones and targets identified in relation to the implementation of the recovery and resilience plan;
(b)
the financial contribution and, where applicable, the amount of the loan support to be paid in the form of a pre-financing in accordance with Article 13 after the approval of the recovery and resilience plan;
(c)
the description of the reforms and of the investment projects and the amount of the estimated total costs of the recovery and resilience plan;
(d)
the time limit, which should be no later than 31 August 2026, by which the final milestones and targets for both investment projects and reforms must be completed;
(e)
the arrangements and timetable for monitoring and implementation of the recovery and resilience plan including, where relevant, measures necessary for complying with Article 22;
(f)
the relevant indicators relating to the fulfilment of the envisaged milestones and targets;
(g)
the arrangements for providing full access by the Commission to the underlying relevant data; and
(h)
where appropriate, the amount of the loan to be paid in instalments and the additional milestones and targets related to the payment of the loan.
6.   The arrangements and timetable for monitoring and implementation as referred to in point (e) of paragraph 5, the relevant indicators relating to the fulfilment of the envisaged milestones and targets referred to in point (f) of paragraph 5, the arrangements for providing full access by the Commission to the underlying data referred to in point (g) of paragraph 5, and, where appropriate, the additional milestones and targets related to the payment of the loan referred to in point (h) of paragraph 5 shall be further specified in operational arrangements to be agreed by the Member State concerned and the Commission after the adoption of the decision referred to in paragraph 1.
7.   The Council shall adopt the implementing decisions referred to in paragraph 1, as a rule, within four weeks of the adoption of the Commission proposal.
8.   The Council, on a proposal from the Commission, shall amend its implementing decision adopted in accordance with Article 20(1) to include the updated maximum financial contribution, calculated in accordance with Article 11(2), without undue delay.
