Article 15
Loan agreement
1.   Before entering into a loan agreement with the Member State concerned, the Commission shall assess whether:
(a)
the justification for requesting the loan support and its amount is considered reasonable and plausible in relation to the additional reforms and investments; and
(b)
the additional reforms and investments comply with the criteria set out in Article 19(3).
2.   Where the Commission considers that the request for loan support fulfils the criteria of paragraph 1, and upon adoption of the Council implementing decision referred to in Article 20(1), the Commission shall enter into a loan agreement with the Member State concerned. The loan agreement, in addition to the elements laid down in Article 220(5) of the Financial Regulation, shall contain the following elements:
(a)
the amount of the loan in euro including, where applicable, the amount of the pre-financed loan in accordance with Article 13;
(b)
the average maturity; Article 220(2) of the Financial Regulation shall not apply with regard to this maturity;
(c)
the pricing formula and the availability period of the loan;
(d)
the maximum number of instalments and the repayment schedule;
(e)
the other elements needed for the implementation of the loan in relation to the reforms and the investment projects concerned in line with the decision referred to in Article 20(3).
3.   In accordance with point (e) of Article 220(5) of the Financial Regulation, costs related to the borrowing of funds for the loans referred to in this Article shall be borne by the beneficiary Member States.
4.   The Commission shall establish the necessary arrangements for the administration of the lending operations related to loans granted in accordance with this Article.
5.   A Member State benefitting from a loan granted in accordance with this Article shall open a dedicated account for the management of the loan received. It shall also transfer the principal and the interest due on any related loan to an account indicated by the Commission in line with the arrangements put in place in accordance with paragraph 4 twenty business days before the corresponding due date.
