Whereas:
(1) Directive 98/70/EC(4) lays down the environmental specifications for market fuels.
(2) Article 95 of the Treaty provides that Commission proposals having as their object the establishment and functioning of the internal market and concerning, inter alia, health and environmental protection, will take as a base a high level of protection and that the European Parliament and the Council will also seek to achieve this objective.
(3) A revision of Directive 98/70/EC is foreseen in order to meet the requirements of Community air quality standards and related objectives and in order to incorporate additional specifications to complement those mandatory specifications already laid down in Annex III and Annex IV to the Directive.
(4) A reduction of the sulphur content of petrol and diesel fuels has been identified as a means of contributing to the achievement of those objectives.
(5) The adverse effect of sulphur in petrol and diesel fuels on the effectiveness of catalytic exhaust gas after-treatment technologies is well established for on-road vehicles and increasingly in the case of non-road mobile machinery.
(6) Road vehicles are increasingly reliant upon catalytic after-treatment devices to attain the emissions limits laid down in Council Directive 70/220/EEC of 20 March 1970 on the approximation of the laws of the Member States on measures to be taken against air pollution by emissions from motor vehicles(5) and Council Directive 88/77/EEC of 3 December 1987 on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the measures to be taken against the emission of gaseous and particulate pollutants from compression ignition engines for use in vehicles, and the emission of gaseous pollutants from positive ignition engines fuelled with natural gas or liquefied petroleum gas for use in vehicles(6). Accordingly a reduction in the sulphur content of petrol and diesel fuels is likely to have a larger impact on exhaust emissions than changes to the other fuel parameters.
(7) The introduction of fuels with a maximum sulphur content of 10 mg/kg will improve the fuel efficiency attainable with new, emerging vehicle technologies and should be examined in the case of non-road mobile machinery and should lead to significant reductions in emissions of conventional air pollutants when used in existing vehicles. These benefits will compensate for the increased emissions of CO2 associated with the production of lower sulphur petrol and diesel fuels.
(8) It is therefore appropriate to lay down measures ensuring the introduction and availability of fuels with a maximum sulphur content of 10 mg/kg. In this regard fiscal incentives have been shown to be effective in promoting the early introduction of higher quality fuels according to national needs and priorities and to shorten the transition period where two different qualities are distributed in the market. The use of fiscal measures, at the appropriate national or Community level, should be promoted and encouraged.
(9) The widespread availability of fuels with a maximum sulphur content of 10 mg/kg will provide a basis for automobile manufacturers to make significant additional progress towards improving the fuel efficiency of new vehicles. The potential contribution of fuels with a maximum sulphur content of 10 mg/kg towards the attainment of the Community's target of 120 g/km for the average CO2 emissions of the new car fleet will be assessed when the current environmental commitments with the automobile manufacturers are reviewed in 2003.
(10) It is necessary to ensure that sufficient quantities of petrol and diesel fuels with a maximum sulphur content of 10 mg/kg are available from 1 January 2005 on an appropriately balanced geographical basis in order to permit the free circulation of new vehicles requiring these fuels whilst ensuring that CO2 emissions reductions from new vehicles outweigh those additional emissions associated with the production of these fuels.
(11) The complete penetration of petrol and diesel fuels with a maximum sulphur content of 10 mg/kg should be provided for from 1 January 2009 in order to allow the fuel manufacturing industry enough time to make the necessary investments to adapt its production plans. In addition, the full introduction of petrol and diesel fuels with a maximum sulphur content of 10 mg/kg from 1 January 2009 will reduce emissions of conventional pollutants from the existing fleet of vehicles leading to an improvement in air quality, whilst ensuring that there is no overall increase in greenhouse gas emissions. In this context it will be necessary to confirm this date in the case of diesel fuels no later than 31 December 2005.
(12) In order to protect human health and/or the environment in specific agglomerations or in specific ecologically or environmentally sensitive areas with special pollution problems, Member States should be permitted, subject to a procedure established in this Directive, to require that fuels may be marketed only if they comply with more stringent environmental specifications, related to pollutants of concern, than those established under this Directive. This procedure is a derogation from the information procedure laid down in Directive 98/34/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 June 1998 laying down a procedure for the provision of information in the field of technical standards and regulations and of rules on information society services(7).
(13) The emissions from engines installed in non-road mobile machinery and agricultural and forestry tractors have to comply with the limits stipulated in Directive 97/68/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 December 1997 on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to measures against the emission of gaseous and particulate pollutants from internal combustion engines to be installed in non-road mobile machinery(8) and in Directive 2000/25/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 May 2000 on action to be taken against the emission of gaseous and particulate pollutants by engines intended to power agricultural or forestry tractors(9). Attainment of these emission limits will become increasingly dependent upon the quality of the gas oils used by these engines and so it is important to include a definition for such fuels in Directive 98/70/EC.
(14) It is appropriate to provide for a uniform system of fuel quality monitoring or national systems that ensure results of equivalent confidence and for systems of reporting in order to assess compliance with the mandated environmental fuel quality specifications.
(15) A procedure should be laid down for updating the measurement methods used to ensure compliance with the mandated fuel quality specifications.
(16) The measures necessary for the implementation of Directive 98/70/EC should be adopted in accordance with Council Decision 1999/468/EC of 28 June 1999 laying down procedures for the exercise of implementing powers conferred on the Commission(10).
(17) Provision should be made for a review of the provisions in Directive 98/70/EC in order to take account of new Community air quality legislation and related environmental objectives, such as the need to encourage alternative fuels, including biofuels, the development of new pollution abatement technologies and the impact of metallic additives and other relevant issues on their performance and to confirm, or otherwise, the date for full introduction of diesel fuels with a maximum sulphur content of 10 mg/kg in order to ensure that there is no overall increase in emissions of greenhouse gases.
(18) A comprehensive review of alternative fuels, including biofuels, should be undertaken, including the discussion of the need for specific legislation.
(19) Member States should lay down rules on penalties applicable to infringements of the provisions of Directive 98/70/EC and ensure that they are implemented.
(20) Directive 98/70/EC should therefore be amended accordingly,
HAVE ADOPTED THIS DIRECTIVE:

