Article 18
Redemption policy and life of ELTIFs
1.   Investors in an ELTIF shall not be able to request the redemption of their units or shares before the end of the life of the ELTIF. Redemptions to investors shall be possible from the day following the date of the end of the life of the ELTIF.
Rules or instruments of incorporation of the ELTIF shall clearly indicate a specific date for the end of the life of the ELTIF and may provide for the right to extend temporarily the life of the ELTIF and the conditions for exercising such a right.
Rules or instruments of incorporation of the ELTIF and disclosures to investors shall lay down the procedures for the redemption of units or shares and the disposal of assets, and state clearly that redemptions to investors shall commence on the day following the date of the end of life of the ELTIF.
2.   By way of derogation from paragraph 1, rules or instruments of incorporation of the ELTIF may provide for the possibility of redemptions before the end of the life of the ELTIF, provided that all of the following conditions are fulfilled:
(a)
redemptions are not granted before the date specified in point (a) of Article 17(1);
(b)
at the time of authorisation and throughout the life of the ELTIF, the manager of the ELTIF is able to demonstrate to the competent authorities that an appropriate liquidity management system and effective procedures for monitoring the liquidity risk of the ELTIF are in place, which are compatible with the long-term investment strategy of the ELTIF and the proposed redemption policy;
(c)
the manager of the ELTIF sets out a defined redemption policy, which clearly indicates the periods of time during which investors may request redemptions;
(d)
the redemption policy of the ELTIF ensures that the overall amount of redemptions within any given period is limited to a percentage of those assets of the ELTIF which are referred to in point (b) of Article 9(1). This percentage shall be aligned to the liquidity management and investment strategy disclosed by the manager of the ELTIF;
(e)
the redemption policy of the ELTIF ensures that investors are treated fairly and redemptions are granted on a pro rata basis if the total amount of requests for redemptions within any given period of time exceed the percentage referred to in point (d) of this paragraph.
3.   The life of an ELTIF shall be consistent with the long-term nature of the ELTIF and shall be sufficient in length to cover the life-cycle of each of the individual assets of the ELTIF, measured according to the illiquidity profile and economic life-cycle of the asset and the stated investment objective of the ELTIF.
4.   Investors may request the winding down of an ELTIF if their redemption requests, made in accordance with the ELTIF's redemption policy, have not been satisfied within one year from the date on which they were made.
5.   Investors shall always have the option to be repaid in cash.
6.   Repayment in kind out of an ELTIF's assets shall be possible only where all of the following conditions are met:
(a)
the rules or instruments of incorporation of the ELTIF provide for this possibility, provided that all investors are treated fairly;
(b)
the investor asks in writing to be repaid through a share of the assets of the ELTIF;
(c)
no specific rules restrict the transfer of those assets.
7.   ESMA shall develop draft regulatory technical standards specifying the circumstances in which the life of an ELTIF is considered sufficient in length to cover the life-cycle of each of the individual assets of the ELTIF, as referred to in paragraph 3.
ESMA shall submit those draft regulatory technical standards to the Commission by 9 September 2015.
Power is delegated to the Commission to adopt the regulatory technical standards referred to in the first subparagraph in accordance with Articles 10 to 14 of Regulation (EU) No 1095/2010.
