Article 30
Additional requirements for marketing ELTIFs to retail investors
1.   The units or shares of an ELTIF may be marketed to retail investors on the condition that retail investors are provided with appropriate investment advice from the manager of the ELTIF or the distributor.
2.   A manager of an ELTIF may directly offer or place units or shares of the ELTIF to retail investors only if that manager is authorised to provide the services referred to in points (a) and (b)(i) of Article 6(4) of Directive 2011/61/EU and only after that manager has performed the suitability test referred to in Article 28(1) of this Regulation.
3.   Where the financial instrument portfolio of a potential retail investor does not exceed EUR 500 000, the manager of the ELTIF or any distributor, after having performed the suitability test referred to in Article 28(1) and having provided appropriate investment advice, shall ensure, on the basis of the information submitted by the potential retail investor, that the potential retail investor does not invest an aggregate amount exceeding 10 % of that investor's financial instrument portfolio in ELTIFs and that the initial minimum amount invested in one or more ELTIFs is EUR 10 000.
The potential retail investor shall be responsible for providing the manager of the ELTIF or the distributor with accurate information on the potential retail investor's financial instrument portfolio and investments in ELTIFs as referred to in the first subparagraph.
For the purpose of this paragraph, a financial instrument portfolio shall be understood to include cash deposits and financial instruments, but shall exclude any financial instruments that have been given as collateral.
4.   The rules or instruments of incorporation of an ELTIF marketed to retail investors shall provide that all investors benefit from equal treatment and no preferential treatment or specific economic benefits are granted to individual investors or groups of investors.
5.   The legal form of an ELTIF marketed to retail investors shall not lead to any further liability for the retail investor or require any additional commitments on behalf of such an investor, apart from the original capital commitment.
6.   Retail investors shall be able, during the subscription period and at least two weeks after the date of their subscription to units or shares of the ELTIF, to cancel their subscription and have the money returned without penalty.
7.   The manager of an ELTIF marketed to retail investors shall establish appropriate procedures and arrangements to deal with retail investor complaints, which allow retail investors to file complaints in the official language or one of the official languages of their Member State.
