Article 9
Governmental services
1.   Governmental services shall be provided to the Programme participants referred to in Article 11(1), (2) and (3).
2.   The Commission shall adopt, by means of implementing acts, detailed rules on the provision of governmental services, by taking into account Article 66 of Regulation (EU) 2021/696, on the basis of the consolidated demand of current and anticipated needs for the different services as identified together with the Member States, and dynamic allocation of the resources and prioritisation of the governmental services between different Programme participants according to relevance and criticality of the users’ needs and, where appropriate, cost-efficiency.
3.   The governmental services referred to in Article 10(1) shall be provided free of charge to government-authorised users.
4.   The Commission shall purchase the services referred to in Article 10(2), under market conditions, in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Financial Regulation with the objective of guaranteeing the provision of those services to all Member States. The precise capacity and budget allocation for those services shall be determined in the implementing act referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article on the basis of input from the Member States.
5.   By way of derogation from paragraph 3 of this Article, the Commission shall, in duly justified cases, where strictly necessary to match supply and demand of governmental services, adopt, by means of implementing acts, a pricing policy, which shall be consistent with the pricing policy referred to in Article 63(1) of Regulation (EU) 2021/696.
By adopting a pricing policy, the Commission shall ensure that the provision of the governmental services does not distort competition, that there is no shortage of the governmental services and that the price identified will not result in an overcompensation of the contractors referred to in Article 19.
6.   The implementing acts referred to in paragraphs 2 and 5 of this Article shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 47(3).
7.   The gradual provision of governmental services shall be ensured as laid down in the service portfolio referred to in Article 10(1), subject to the availability of the infrastructure of the secure connectivity system, following the implementation of the activities set out in Article 4(1), points (a) and (b), and building on and leveraging existing services and capabilities as appropriate.
8.   Equal treatment of the Member States shall be ensured when providing governmental services in accordance with their needs as referred to in Article 25(7).
