Article 26
Role of the Commission
1.   The Commission shall have overall responsibility for the implementation of the Programme, including in the field of security, without prejudice to Member States’ prerogatives in the area of national security. The Commission shall, in accordance with this Regulation, determine the priorities and evolution of the Programme, in line with the duly established user requirements, and shall supervise its implementation, without prejudice to other policies of the Union.
2.   The Commission shall ensure a clear division of tasks and responsibilities between the various entities involved in the Programme and shall coordinate the activities of those entities. The Commission shall also ensure that all the entrusted entities involved in the implementation of the Programme protect the interests of the Union, guarantee the sound management of the Union’s funds and comply with the Financial Regulation and this Regulation.
3.   The Commission shall procure, award and sign the contracts referred to in Article 19.
4.   The Commission may entrust tasks concerning the Programme to the Agency and ESA under indirect management, according to their respective roles and responsibilities, as set out under Articles 27 and 28. In order to facilitate the achievement of the objectives referred to in Article 3 and promote the most efficient cooperation between the Commission, the Agency and ESA, the Commission may establish contribution agreements with each entrusted entity.
The Commission shall adopt the contribution decisions regarding the contribution agreements by means of implementing acts. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the advisory procedure referred to in Article 47(2).
5.   Without prejudice to the tasks of the contractors referred to in Article 19, the Agency or other entrusted entities, the Commission shall ensure the uptake and use of the governmental services. It shall ensure complementarity, consistency, synergies and links between the Programme and other Union actions and programmes.
6.   Where appropriate, the Commission shall ensure the coherence of activities performed in the context of the Programme with the activities already carried out in the space domain at Union, national or international level. It shall encourage cooperation between the Member States, facilitate interoperability of their technological capacities and developments in the space domain, and, where relevant to the Programme, aim to ensure coherence of the secure connectivity system with the relevant activities and interoperability of capacities developed under the national recovery and resilience plans.
7.   The Commission shall inform the European Parliament and the Programme committee referred to in Article 47(1) of the interim and final results of the evaluation of any procurement procedures and of any contracts, including subcontracts, with public and private entities.
