Article 27
Role of the Agency
1.   The own task of the Agency shall be to ensure, through its Security Accreditation Board, the security accreditation of the governmental infrastructure and governmental services in accordance with Chapter II of Title V of Regulation (EU) 2021/696.
2.   The Commission shall entrust, by means of one or more contribution agreements, subject to the operational readiness of the Agency, in particular in terms of adequate level of human resources, the following tasks to the Agency:
(a)
all or part of the operational management of the governmental infrastructure of the Programme;
(b)
operational security of the governmental infrastructure, including risk and threat analysis, security monitoring, in particular setting technical specifications and operational procedures, and monitoring their compliance with the general security requirements referred to in Article 30(3).
(c)
provision of the governmental services, in particular through the GOVSATCOM Hub;
(d)
management of the contracts referred to in Article 19, after their award and signature;
(e)
overarching coordination of user-related aspects of the governmental services in close collaboration with Member States, relevant Union agencies, the EEAS and other entities;
(f)
undertaking activities related to user uptake of services offered by the Programme without affecting the activities performed by the contractors under the contracts referred to in Article 19.
3.   The Commission may entrust, by means of one or more contribution agreements, other tasks to the Agency, on the basis of the needs of the Programme.
4.   Where activities are entrusted to the Agency, appropriate financial, human and administrative resources shall be ensured for their implementation. For that purpose, the Commission may allocate part of the budget for the activities entrusted to the Agency for the funding of human resources necessary for their implementation.
5.   By way of derogation from Article 62(1) of the Financial Regulation and subject to the Commission’s assessment of the protection of the Union’s interests, the Agency may entrust, by means of contribution agreements, specific activities to other entities, within their respective fields of competence, under the conditions of indirect management applying to the Commission.
