Article 5
Infrastructure of the secure connectivity system
1.   The secure connectivity system shall be established by defining, designing, developing, building and operating a multi-orbital connectivity infrastructure, adjusted to the evolution of governmental demand for satellite communications and offering low latency. It shall be modular in order to fulfil the objectives referred to in Article 3 and to establish the service portfolio for governmental services laid down in Article 10(1). It shall complement and integrate the existing and future capacities used in the framework of the GOVSATCOM component. It shall consist of a governmental infrastructure, as referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article, and a commercial infrastructure, as referred to in paragraph 4 of this Article.
2.   The governmental infrastructure of the secure connectivity system shall include all the related ground and space assets which are required for the provision of the governmental services, as laid down in Article 10(1), points (a) and (b), of this Regulation, including the following assets:
(a)
either satellites or satellite subsystems, including payloads;
(b)
EuroQCI;
(c)
infrastructure for monitoring the security of the governmental infrastructure and governmental services;
(d)
ground infrastructure for the provision of the services to government-authorised users, including the GOVSATCOM ground segment infrastructure, which is to be scaled up, in particular the GOVSATCOM Hubs referred to in Article 67 of Regulation (EU) 2021/696.
The governmental infrastructure shall host, where appropriate, additional satellite subsystems, in particular payloads, that may be used as part of the space-based infrastructure of the components of the Union Space Programme referred to in Article 3 of Regulation (EU) 2021/696 under the terms and conditions set out in that Regulation, as well as satellite subsystems used for the provision of non-communication services to Member States.
3.   The Commission shall adopt, by means of implementing acts, where necessary, measures required to determine the location of the centres belonging to the ground governmental infrastructure, in accordance with the general security requirements referred to in Article 30(3) of this Regulation, following an open and transparent process. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 47(3) of this Regulation.
For the protection of the security interests of the Union and its Member States the centres referred to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph shall be, where possible, located in the territory of the Member States and governed by a hosting agreement in the form of an administrative agreement between the Union and the Member State concerned.
Where it is not possible to locate the centres in the territory of the Member States, the Commission may determine the location of such centres in the territory of members of EFTA which are members of the EEA or in the territory of another third country, subject to a hosting agreement between the Union and the third country concerned concluded in accordance with Article 218 TFEU.
Notwithstanding the first subparagraph of this paragraph, the location of the GOVSATCOM Hubs shall be determined in accordance with Article 67(2) of Regulation (EU) 2021/696.
4.   The commercial infrastructure of the secure connectivity system shall include all space and ground assets other than those being part of the governmental infrastructure. The commercial infrastructure shall not impair the performance or security of the governmental infrastructure. The commercial infrastructure and any related risks shall be entirely financed by the contractors referred to in Article 19, in order to fulfil the objective referred to in Article 3(1), point (b).
5.   In order to protect the security interests of the Union, the space assets of the governmental infrastructure shall be launched by existing and future service providers, including those using small launchers and microlaunchers, that comply with the eligibility and participation conditions set out in Article 22 and, only in justified exceptional circumstances, from the territory of a third country.
