Article 8
Environmental and space sustainability
1.   The Programme shall be implemented with a view to ensuring environmental and space sustainability. To that end, the contracts and procedures referred to in Article 19 shall include provisions on:
(a)
the minimisation of greenhouse gas emissions generated by the development, production and deployment of the infrastructure;
(b)
the establishment of a scheme to offset the remaining greenhouse gas emissions;
(c)
appropriate measures to reduce visible and invisible radiation pollution caused by spacecraft, and that can hamper astronomical observations or any other type of research and observations;
(d)
the use of appropriate collision-avoidance technologies for spacecraft;
(e)
the submission and implementation of a comprehensive mitigation plan regarding space debris before the deployment phase, including orbital positioning data, in order to ensure the avoidance of space debris by the satellites of the constellation.
2.   The contracts and procedures referred to in Article 19 of this Regulation shall include an obligation to provide data, in particular ephemeris data and planned manoeuvres, to the entities in charge of producing SST information as defined in Article 2, point (10), of Regulation (EU) 2021/696 and SST services as referred to in Article 55 of that Regulation.
3.   The Commission shall ensure that a comprehensive database of the Programme’s space assets, containing, in particular, data relating to environmental and space sustainability aspects, is maintained.
4.   The Commission shall adopt delegated acts, in accordance with Article 45, in order to supplement this Regulation by specifying the characteristics of, and establishing the methodology and the processes to maintain and update the database referred to in paragraph 3 of this Article.
5.   The scope of delegated acts adopted in accordance with paragraph 4 shall be limited to:
(a)
the space assets owned by the Union, as referred to in Articles 5(2) and 19(10);
(b)
the space assets owned by the contractors referred to in Article 19, as referred to in Articles 5(4) and 19(10).
