Article 13
Budget
1.   The financial envelope for the implementation of the Programme for the period from 1 January 2023 to 31 December 2027 and for covering the associated risks shall be EUR 1,65 billion in current prices.
The amount referred to in the first subparagraph shall be distributed indicatively from the MFF 2021-2027 as follows:
(a)
EUR 1 billion from Heading 1 (Single Market, Innovation and Digital);
(b)
EUR 0,5 billion from Heading 5 (Security and Defence);
(c)
EUR 0,15 billion from Heading 6 (Neighbourhood and the World).
2.   The Programme shall be complemented by an amount of EUR 0,75 billion implemented under the Horizon Europe Programme, the GOVSATCOM component and the Neighbourhood, Development and International Cooperation Instrument (NDICI) for a maximum indicative amount of EUR 0,38 billion, EUR 0,22 billion and EUR 0,15 billion, respectively. That funding shall be implemented in compliance with the objectives, rules and procedures set out, respectively, in Regulation (EU) 2021/695 and Decision (EU) 2021/764, and Regulations (EU) 2021/696 and (EU) 2021/947.
3.   The amount referred to in paragraph 1, first subparagraph, of this Article shall be used to cover all the activities required to fulfil the objectives referred to in Article 3(1), point (a), and to cover the purchase of services referred to in Article 9(4). Such expenditure may also cover:
(a)
studies and meetings of experts, in particular compliance with its cost and time constraints;
(b)
information and communication activities, including corporate communication on the policy priorities of the Union where they are directly linked to the objectives of this Regulation, with a particular view to creating synergies with other Union policies;
(c)
the information technology networks whose function it is to process or exchange information, and the administrative management measures implemented by the Commission, including in the field of security;
(d)
technical and administrative assistance for the implementation of the Programme, such as preparatory, monitoring, control, audit and evaluation activities including corporate information technology systems.
4.   Actions that receive cumulative funding from different Union programmes shall be audited only once, covering all involved programmes and their respective applicable rules.
5.   The budgetary commitments for activities extending over more than one financial year may be broken down over several years into annual instalments.
6.   Resources allocated to Member States under shared management may, at the request of the Member State concerned, be transferred to the Programme, subject to the conditions set out in Article 26 of Regulation (EU) 2021/1060 of the European Parliament and of the Council (28). The Commission shall implement those resources directly in accordance with Article 62(1), first subparagraph, point (a), of the Financial Regulation or indirectly in accordance with point (c) of that subparagraph. Those resources shall be used for the benefit of the Member State concerned.
