Article 5
General objective, priorities and specific objectives
1.   The general objective of Horizon 2020 is to contribute to building a society and an economy based on knowledge and innovation across the Union by leveraging additional research, development and innovation funding and by contributing to attaining research and development targets, including the target of 3 % of GDP for research and development across the Union by 2020. It shall thereby support the implementation of the Europe 2020 strategy and other Union policies, as well as the achievement and functioning of the European Research Area (ERA). The first set of relevant performance indicators for assessing progress against the general objective is set out in the introduction of Annex I.
2.   The general objective set out in paragraph 1 shall be pursued through three mutually reinforcing priorities dedicated to:
(a)
Excellent science;
(b)
Industrial leadership;
(c)
Societal challenges.
The specific objectives corresponding to each of those three priorities are set out in Parts I to III of Annex I, together with the broad lines of activities.
3.   The general objective set out in paragraph 1 shall also be pursued through the specific objectives 'Spreading excellence and widening participation' and 'Science with and for society' set out in Parts IV and V of Annex I respectively, together with the broad lines of activities.
4.   The JRC shall contribute to the general objective and the priorities set out in paragraphs 1 and 2 respectively by providing scientific and technical support to Union policies in collaboration with relevant national and regional research stakeholders, where appropriate, for example on the development of smart specialisation strategies. The specific objective and the broad lines of activities are set out in Part VI of Annex I.
5.   The European Institute of Innovation and Technology (EIT) shall contribute to the general objective and the priorities set out in paragraphs 1 and 2 respectively, with the specific objective of integrating the knowledge triangle of higher education, research and innovation. The relevant performance indicators for the EIT are set out in the introduction of Annex I and the specific objective together with the broad lines of activities are set out in Part VII of Annex I.
6.   Within the priorities, specific objectives and broad lines of activities referred to in paragraphs 2 and 3, account may be taken of new and unforeseen needs that arise during the period of implementation of Horizon 2020. This may, if duly justified, include responses to emerging opportunities, crises and threats, as well as responses to needs relating to the development of new Union policies.
