Article 27
International cooperation with third countries and international organisations
1.   Legal entities, as defined in point 13 of Article 2(1) of Regulation (EU) No 1290/2013, established in third countries and international organisations shall be eligible to participate in indirect actions of Horizon 2020 under the conditions set out in that Regulation. International cooperation with third countries and international organisations shall be promoted and integrated into Horizon 2020 to achieve, in particular, the following objectives:
(a)
strengthening the Union's excellence and attractiveness in research and innovation as well as its economic and industrial competitiveness;
(b)
effectively tackling common societal challenges;
(c)
supporting the Union's external and development policy objectives, complementing external and development programmes including international commitments and their related goals, such as the achievement of the United Nations' Millennium Development Goals. Synergies with other Union policies will be sought.
2.   Targeted actions with the objective of promoting cooperation with specific third countries or groups of third countries, including strategic partners of the Union, shall be implemented on the basis of a strategic approach as well as common interest, priorities, and mutual benefit, taking into account their scientific and technological capabilities and specific needs, market opportunities, and the expected impact of such actions.
Reciprocal access to third country programmes should be encouraged and, where appropriate, monitored. In order to maximise the impact of international cooperation, coordination and synergies with initiatives of Member States and associated countries shall be promoted. The nature of the cooperation may vary according to the specific partner countries.
Cooperation priorities shall take into account developments in Union policies, opportunities for cooperation with third countries, and fair and equitable dealing with intellectual property rights.
3.   In addition, horizontal and cross-cutting activities to promote the strategic development of international cooperation shall be implemented under Horizon 2020.
