Article 25
Public-private partnerships
1.   Horizon 2020 may be implemented through public-private partnerships where all the partners concerned commit to supporting the development and implementation of pre-competitive research and of innovation activities of strategic importance to the Union's competitiveness and industrial leadership or to addressing specific societal challenges. Public-private partnerships shall be implemented in such a way that full participation of the best European players is not impeded.
2.   The involvement of the Union in public-private partnerships shall make use of the pre-existing and lean governance structures and may take one of the following forms:
(a)
financial contributions from the Union to joint undertakings established pursuant to Article 187 TFEU under the Seventh Framework Programme, subject to the amendment of their basic acts; to new public-private partnerships established pursuant to Article 187 TFEU; and to other funding bodies referred to in points (iv) and (vii) of point (c) of Article 58(1) of Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012. This form of partnerships shall only be implemented where the scope of the objectives pursued and the scale of the resources required justify it taking full account of the relevant impact assessments, and where other forms of partnerships would not fulfil the objectives or would not generate the necessary leverage;
(b)
contractual arrangements between the partners referred to in paragraph 1, which specify the objectives of the partnership, respective commitments of the partners, key performance indicators, and outputs to be delivered, including the identification of research and innovation activities that require support from Horizon 2020.
With a view to involving interested partners, including, as appropriate, end-users, universities, SMEs and research institutions, public-private partnerships shall make public funds accessible through transparent processes and mainly through competitive calls, governed by rules for participation in compliance with those of Horizon 2020. Exceptions to the use of competitive calls should be duly justified.
3.   Public-private partnerships shall be identified and implemented in an open, transparent and efficient way. Their identification shall be based on all of the following criteria:
(a)
the demonstration of the added value of the action at Union level and of the choice of the instrument to be used;
(b)
the scale of impact on industrial competitiveness, job creation, sustainable growth and socio-economic issues, including societal challenges, assessed against clearly specified and measurable objectives;
(c)
the long-term commitment, including a balanced contribution from all partners based on a shared vision and clearly defined objectives;
(d)
the scale of the resources involved and the ability to leverage additional investments in research and innovation;
(e)
a clear definition of roles for each of the partners and agreed key performance indicators over the period chosen;
(f)
complementarity with other parts of Horizon 2020 and alignment with the Union research and innovation strategic priorities, in particular those of the Europe 2020 strategy.
Where appropriate, complementarity between priorities and activities and the involvement of Member States shall be ensured in public-private partnerships.
4.   The research priorities covered by public-private partnerships may, where appropriate, be included in regular calls in Horizon 2020 work programmes, in order to develop new synergies with research and innovation activities of strategic importance.
