Article 19
Increase in the gross tonnage of a fishing vessel to improve safety, working conditions or energy efficiency
1.   By way of derogation from point (a) of Article 13, the EMFAF may support operations that increase the gross tonnage of a fishing vessel for the purposes of improving safety, working conditions or energy efficiency.
The support referred to in the first subparagraph shall contribute to the specific objective referred to in point (a) of Article 14(1).
2.   Support under this Article may be granted only under the following conditions:
(a)
the fishing vessel belongs to a fleet segment for which the latest report on fishing capacity, referred to in Article 22(2) of Regulation (EU) No 1380/2013, has shown a balance of the fishing capacity of the segment with the fishing opportunities available to that segment;
(b)
the fishing vessel is not longer than 24 metres in overall length;
(c)
the fishing vessel has been registered in the Union fleet register for at least the 10 calendar years preceding the year of submission of the application for support; and
(d)
the entry into the fishing fleet of new fishing capacity generated by the operation is compensated for by the prior withdrawal of at least the same amount of fishing capacity without public aid from the same fleet segment or from a fleet segment for which the latest report on fishing capacity, referred to in Article 22(2) of Regulation (EU) No 1380/2013, has shown that the fishing capacity is not in balance with the fishing opportunities available to that segment.
3.   For the purposes of paragraph 1, only the following operations shall be eligible:
(a)
the increase in gross tonnage necessary for the subsequent installation or renovation of accommodation facilities dedicated to the exclusive use of the crew, including sanitary facilities, common areas, kitchen facilities and shelter deck structures;
(b)
the increase in gross tonnage necessary for the subsequent improvement or installation of on-board fire prevention systems, safety and alarm systems or noise-reduction systems;
(c)
the increase in gross tonnage necessary for the subsequent installation of integrated bridge systems to improve navigation or engine control;
(d)
the increase in gross tonnage necessary for the subsequent installation or renovation of an engine or a propulsion system that demonstrates a better energy efficiency or lower CO2 emissions compared to the previous situation, which does not have a power exceeding the fishing vessel’s previously certified engine power pursuant to Article 40(1) of Regulation (EC) No 1224/2009, and whose maximum power output is certified by the manufacturer for that engine or propulsion system model;
(e)
the replacement or renovation of the bulbous bow provided that it improves the overall energy efficiency of the fishing vessel.
4.   As part of the data provided pursuant to Article 46(3), Member States shall communicate to the Commission the characteristics of the operations supported under this Article, including the amount of the fishing capacity increased and the purpose of that increase.
5.   Support under this Article shall not cover operations related to investments aimed at improving safety, working conditions or energy efficiency where such operations do not increase the fishing capacity of the vessel concerned. Those operations may be supported in accordance with Article 12.
