Article 45
Financial corrections by the Commission
1.   In accordance with Article 104(5) of Regulation (EU) 2021/1060, the Commission may adopt implementing acts making financial corrections by cancelling all or part of the Union contribution to the programme if, after carrying out the necessary examination, it concludes that:
(a)
expenditure contained in a payment application is affected by cases where any of the situations referred to in Article 11(2) of this Regulation has occurred and has not been corrected by the Member State concerned prior to the opening of the correction procedure under this paragraph;
(b)
expenditure contained in a payment application is affected by cases of serious non-compliance with the rules of the CFP by the Member State which have resulted in the suspension of payment under Article 43 of this Regulation and the Member State concerned still fails to demonstrate that it has taken the necessary remedial action to ensure compliance with, and the enforcement of, applicable rules of the CFP in the future.
Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 63(2) of this Regulation.
2.   The Commission shall decide on the amount of the correction taking into account the nature, gravity, duration and repetition of the serious non-compliance with the rules of the CFP by the Member State or beneficiary concerned and the importance of the EMFAF contribution to the economic activity of the beneficiary concerned.
3.   Where it is not possible to quantify precisely the amount of expenditure linked to serious non-compliance with the rules of the CFP by the Member State, the Commission shall apply a flat rate or extrapolated financial correction in accordance with paragraph 4.
4.   The Commission may adopt implementing acts to determine the criteria for establishing the level of financial correction to be applied and the criteria for applying flat rates or extrapolated financial corrections. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 63(2).
