Article 26
Specific objectives
1.   Support under this Chapter shall cover interventions that contribute to the achievement of the objectives of the CFP as set out in Article 2 of Regulation (EU) No 1380/2013, through the following specific objectives:
(a)
promoting sustainable aquaculture activities, especially strengthening the competitiveness of aquaculture production, while ensuring that the activities are environmentally sustainable in the long term;
(b)
promoting marketing, quality and added value of fishery and aquaculture products, as well as processing of those products.
2.   By way of derogation from point (j) of Article 13, in case of exceptional events causing a significant disruption of markets, the support referred to in point (b) of paragraph 1 of this Article may cover:
(a)
compensation to operators of the fishery and aquaculture sector for their income foregone or additional costs; and
(b)
compensation to recognised producer organisations and associations of producer organisations which store fishery products listed in Annex II to Regulation (EU) No 1379/2013, provided that those products are stored in accordance with Articles 30 and 31 of that Regulation.
The support referred to in the first subparagraph may be eligible only if the Commission has established, by means of an implementing decision, the occurrence of an exceptional event. Expenditure shall be eligible only during the duration set out in that implementing decision.
3.   In addition to the activities referred to in point (a) of paragraph 1 of this Article within the scope of Article 2 of Regulation (EU) No 1380/2013, support under that point may also cover interventions that contribute to aquaculture providing environmental services, as well as to ensuring animal health and welfare in aquaculture within the scope of Regulation (EU) 2016/429 of the European Parliament and of the Council (32).
4.   Support under point (b) of paragraph 1 of this Article may also contribute to the achievement of the objectives of common organisation of the markets in fishery and aquaculture products as provided for in Article 35 of Regulation (EU) No 1380/2013, including the production and marketing plans as described in Article 28 of Regulation (EU) No 1379/2013.
