Article 21
Temporary cessation of fishing activities
1.   By way of derogation from point (e) of Article 13, the EMFAF may support compensation for the temporary cessation of fishing activities.
The support referred to in the first subparagraph shall contribute to the specific objective referred to in point (c) of Article 14(1).
2.   Support under this Article may be granted only in the case of:
(a)
conservation measures, as referred to in points (a), (b), (c), (i) and (j) of Article 7(1) of Regulation (EU) No 1380/2013 or, where applicable to the Union, equivalent conservation measures adopted by RFMOs;
(b)
Commission measures in case of a serious threat to marine biological resources, as referred to in Article 12 of Regulation (EU) No 1380/2013;
(c)
Member States’ emergency measures pursuant to Article 13 of Regulation (EU) No 1380/2013;
(d)
the interruption, due to reasons of force majeure, of the application of a SFPA or protocol thereto; or
(e)
natural disasters, environmental incidents or health crises, as formally recognised by the competent authorities of the relevant Member State.
3.   The support referred to in paragraph 1 may only be granted where the fishing activities of the vessel or fisher concerned are stopped during at least 30 days in a given calendar year.
4.   The support referred to in point (a) of paragraph 2 may only be granted where, based on scientific advice, a reduction of fishing effort is needed in order to achieve the objectives referred to in Article 2(2) and point (a) of Article 2(5) of Regulation (EU) No 1380/2013.
5.   The support referred to in paragraph 1 may only be granted to:
(a)
owners or operators of Union fishing vessels which are registered as active and which have carried out fishing activities at sea for at least 120 days during the last two calendar years preceding the year of submission of the application for support;
(b)
fishers who have worked at sea on board a Union fishing vessel concerned by the temporary cessation for at least 120 days during the last two calendar years preceding the year of submission of the application for support; or
(c)
fishers on foot who have carried out fishing activities for at least 120 days during the last two calendar years preceding the year of submission of the application for support.
The reference to the number of days at sea in this paragraph shall not apply to eel fisheries.
6.   The support referred to in paragraph 1 may be granted for a maximum duration of 12 months per vessel or per fisher during the programming period.
7.   All fishing activities carried out by the vessels or fishers concerned shall be effectively suspended during the period concerned by the temporary cessation. The Member State concerned shall satisfy itself that the vessel or fisher concerned has ceased any fishing activities during the period concerned by the temporary cessation and that any overcompensation resulting from the use of the vessel for other purposes is avoided.
