Article 18
Replacement or modernisation of a main or ancillary engine
1.   By way of derogation from point (m) of Article 13, the EMFAF may support the replacement or modernisation of a main or ancillary engine of a fishing vessel up to 24 metres in overall length.
The support referred to in the first subparagraph shall contribute to the specific objective referred to in point (b) of Article 14(1).
2.   Support under this Article may be granted only under the following conditions:
(a)
the vessel belongs to a fleet segment for which the latest report on fishing capacity, referred to in Article 22(2) of Regulation (EU) No 1380/2013, has shown a balance with the fishing opportunities available to that segment;
(b)
the vessel has been registered in the Union fleet register for at least five calendar years preceding the year of submission of the application for support;
(c)
for small-scale coastal fishing vessels, the new or modernised engine does not have more power in kW than that of the current engine; and
(d)
for other vessels up to 24 metres in overall length, the new or modernised engine does not have more power in kW than that of the current engine and emits at least 20 % less CO2 compared to the current engine.
3.   Member States shall ensure that all replaced or modernised engines are subject to a physical verification.
4.   The fishing capacity withdrawn due to the replacement or modernisation of a main or ancillary engine shall not be replaced.
5.   The reduction of CO2 emission required under point (d) of paragraph 2 shall be considered to be met in either of the following cases:
(a)
where relevant information certified by the manufacturer of the engine concerned as part of a type approval or product certificate indicates that the new engine emits 20 % less CO2 than the engine being replaced; or
(b)
where relevant information certified by the manufacturer of the engine concerned as part of a type approval or product certificate indicates that the new engine uses 20 % less fuel than the engine being replaced.
Where the relevant information certified by the manufacturer of the engine concerned as part of a type approval or product certificate for one or both of the engines does not permit a comparison of the CO2 emission or fuel consumption, the reduction of CO2 emission required under point (d) of paragraph 2 shall be considered to be met in any of the following cases:
(a)
the new engine uses an energy-efficient technology and the age difference between the new engine and the engine being replaced is at least seven years;
(b)
the new engine uses a type of fuel or a propulsion system which is considered to emit less CO2 than the engine being replaced;
(c)
the Member State measures that the new engine emits 20 % less CO2 or uses 20 % less fuel than the engine being replaced under the normal fishing effort of the vessel concerned.
The Commission shall adopt implementing acts to identify the energy-efficient technologies referred to in point (a) of the second subparagraph of this paragraph and to further specify the methodology elements for the implementation of point (c) of that subparagraph. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 63(2).
