Article 17
First acquisition of a fishing vessel
1.   By way of derogation from point (c) of Article 13, the EMFAF may support the first acquisition of a fishing vessel or the acquisition of partial ownership thereof.
The support referred to in the first subparagraph shall contribute to the specific objective referred to in point (a) of Article 14(1).
2.   Support under this Article may only be granted to a natural person who:
(a)
is no more than 40 years of age at the date of submission of the application for support; and
(b)
has worked at least five years as fisher or has acquired adequate qualification.
3.   Support under paragraph 1 may also be granted to legal entities wholly owned by one or more natural persons who each fulfil the conditions set out in paragraph 2.
4.   Support under this Article may be granted for the joint first acquisition of a fishing vessel by several natural persons who each fulfil the conditions set out in paragraph 2.
5.   Support under this Article may also be granted for the acquisition of partial ownership of a fishing vessel by a natural person who fulfils the conditions set out in paragraph 2 and who shall be deemed to have controlling rights on that vessel through ownership of at least of 33 % of the vessel or of the shares in the vessel or by a legal entity which fulfils the conditions set out in paragraph 3 and which shall be deemed to have controlling rights on that vessel through ownership of at least of 33 % of the vessel or of the shares in the vessel.
6.   Support under this Article may be granted only in respect of a fishing vessel which:
(a)
belongs to a fleet segment for which the latest report on fishing capacity, referred to in Article 22(2) of Regulation (EU) No 1380/2013, has shown a balance with the fishing opportunities available to that segment;
(b)
is equipped for fishing activities;
(c)
is not longer than 24 metres in overall length;
(d)
has been registered in the Union fleet register for at least three calendar years preceding the year of submission of the application for support in the case of a small-scale coastal fishing vessel, and for at least five calendar years in the case of another type of vessel; and
(e)
has been registered in the Union fleet register for a maximum of 30 calendar years preceding the year of submission of the application for support.
7.   The first acquisition of a fishing vessel supported under this Article shall not be considered a transfer of ownership of a business within the meaning of point (g) of Article 13.
