Article 18
Information, communication and visibility
1.   The recipients of Union funding under IPA III shall acknowledge the origin of, and ensure the visibility of, the Union funding, in particular when promoting and reporting on the actions and their results, by highlighting the support received from the Union and its benefits for people in a visible manner in communication materials related to the actions supported under this Regulation and by providing coherent, effective and proportionate targeted information to multiple audiences in a strategic manner, including to the media and the public.
Agreements concluded with recipients of Union funding under IPA III shall contain obligations in that respect.
Agreements concluded with beneficiaries listed in Annex I shall include the principles to be followed in visibility and communication activities and the objectives of those activities, and a clear obligation to actively publicise information about programmes and actions under IPA III.
In order to improve the results of communication activities for cross-border cooperation programmes between the beneficiaries listed in Annex I, specific joint communication activities shall be planned.
Actions under IPA III shall be carried out in accordance with communication and visibility requirements in Union-financed external actions and in other relevant guidelines.
2.   The Commission shall carry out information and communication actions relating to IPA III and its actions and results, in particular at local and regional level, in order to ensure the visibility of the Union’s financial assistance. Financial resources allocated under IPA III shall also contribute to the corporate communication of, and reporting on, the political priorities of the Union, as far as these priorities are directly related to the objectives referred to in Article 3.
3.   IPA III shall support strategic communication and public diplomacy, including the fight against disinformation, with a view to communicating the Union’s values as well as the added value of, and results achieved by the Union’s actions.
4.   The Commission shall make publicly available relevant information on all actions financed under this Regulation in accordance with Article 38 of the Financial Regulation, including as appropriate through a comprehensive single website.
5.   Where security issues or political sensitivities may make it preferable or necessary to limit communication and visibility activities in certain countries or areas or during certain periods, the target audience and the visibility tools, products and channels to be used in promoting a given action shall be determined on a case-by-case basis, in consultation with and in agreement with the Union. Any such exceptions shall be duly justified and their scope shall be specified and limited in each case. Where rapid intervention is required in response to a sudden crisis, it shall not be necessary to produce a full communication and visibility plan immediately. In such situations, however, the Union’s support shall nevertheless be appropriately indicated from the start.
