Article 9
Implementing measures and methods
1.   Assistance under this Regulation shall be implemented in direct management or indirect management in accordance with the Financial Regulation through annual or multiannual action plans and measures as referred to in Chapter III of Title II of Regulation (EU) 2021/947. The Commission shall adopt, by means of implementing acts, action plans and measures. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 17(3). Chapter III of Title II of Regulation (EU) 2021/947 shall apply to this Regulation with the exception of Article 28(1) of that Regulation.
2.   The transition from direct management by the Commission to indirect management by the beneficiaries listed in Annex I shall be progressive and in line with the respective capacities of those beneficiaries as well as with regard to principles of good governance. The Commission shall take appropriate supervisory measures ensuring the protection of the financial interests of the Union, as appropriate. The Commission may also reverse that transition in the event that a beneficiary listed in Annex I fails to fulfil relevant obligations, principles, objectives and rules established in the Financial Regulation.
3.   The European Parliament may hold regular exchanges of views with the Commission regarding its own assistance programmes, on matters such as capacity-building, including related mediation and dialogue, and election observation.
4.   Action plans under this Regulation may be adopted for a period of up to seven years.
5.   Budget support shall be based on mutual accountability and a shared commitment to democracy, human rights and the rule of law, and shall be provided in accordance with Article 236 of the Financial Regulation and Article 27 of Regulation (EU) 2021/947. Actions under IPA III shall support the development of parliamentary control, audit capacities and increased transparency and public access to information.
