Whereas:
(1)
Regulation (EU) No 231/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council (4) expired on 31 December 2020. In order to maintain the Union’s effectiveness in external action, a framework for planning and delivering external assistance should be maintained for the period between 2021 and 2027.
(2)
The objective of an instrument for pre-accession assistance is to prepare beneficiaries for future membership of the Union and to support their accession process. It is therefore essential to have a dedicated instrument for pre-accession assistance to the beneficiaries listed in Annex I for the 2021-2027 period (IPA III) in support of enlargement, while ensuring that its objectives and functioning are consistent with, and complementary to, the general objectives of Union external action as laid down in Article 21 of the Treaty on European Union (TEU), including respect for fundamental rights and principles as well as the protection and promotion of human rights, democracy and the rule of law. This instrument should also be complementary with the Neighbourhood, Development and International Cooperation Instrument – Global Europe (NDICI) established under Regulation (EU) 2021/947 of the European Parliament and of the Council (5).
(3)
Article 49 TEU provides that any European State which respects the values of respect for human dignity, freedom, democracy, equality, the rule of law and respect for human rights, including the rights of persons belonging to minorities, and is committed to promoting those values may apply to become a member of the Union. Those values are common to Member States in a society in which pluralism, non-discrimination, tolerance, justice, solidarity and equality between women and men prevail.
(4)
A European State which has applied to join the Union can become a member of the Union only where it has been confirmed that it fully meets the accession criteria established at the Copenhagen European Council in June 1993 (the ‘Copenhagen criteria’) and provided that the Union has the capacity to integrate the new member. The Copenhagen criteria relate to the stability of institutions which guarantee democracy, the rule of law, human rights and respect for and protection of minorities, the existence of a functioning market economy as well as the capacity to cope with competitive pressure and market forces within the Union, and the ability to assume not only the rights but also the obligations under the Treaties, including the pursuit of the aims of political, economic and monetary union.
(5)
The enlargement policy of the Union is a strategic investment in peace, security, stability and prosperity in Europe and allows the Union to be better positioned to address global challenges. It also provides increased economic and trade opportunities to the mutual benefit of the Union and the aspiring Member States, while ensuring a gradual transformation of the beneficiaries. The prospect of Union membership has a powerful transformative effect, embedding positive democratic, political, economic and societal change.
(6)
The enlargement process is built on established criteria and fair and rigorous conditionality. Each beneficiary is assessed on its own merits. The assessment of progress achieved and the identification of shortcomings aim to provide incentives and guidance to the beneficiaries listed in Annex I to pursue the necessary far-reaching reforms. For the prospect of enlargement to become a reality, a firm commitment to ‘fundamentals first’ remains essential. The ‘fundamentals first’ approach links the rule of law and fundamental rights with the two other crucial areas of the accession process: economic governance – strengthened focus on economic development and improved competitiveness – and the strengthening of democratic institutions and public administration reform. Each of the three fundamentals is of crucial importance for the reform processes in the beneficiaries listed in Annex I and addresses key concerns of the people. Progress towards accession depends on each applicant’s respect for the Union’s values and its capacity to undertake and implement the necessary reforms to align its political, institutional, legal, administrative and economic systems with the rules, standards, policies and practices of the Union.
(7)
Good neighbourly relations and regional cooperation are essential elements of the enlargement process and are critical for security and stability of the Union as a whole. The definitive, inclusive and binding resolution of bilateral disputes is also important.
(8)
Embracing and committing to core European values is a choice, and is essential for all partners aspiring to Union membership. In line with this, the partners should take ownership and fully commit to European values as well as to upholding a global order based on rules and values and vigorously pursuing the necessary reforms in the interest of their people. This includes progressive alignment with the Union’s common foreign and security policy, in particular on issues where major common interests are at stake, such as restrictive measures and tackling disinformation and other hybrid threats.
(9)
The Commission emphasised the firm, merit-based prospect of Union membership for the Western Balkans in its communication of 6 February 2018 entitled ‘A credible enlargement perspective for and enhanced EU engagement with the Western Balkans’. On 5 February 2020, the Commission presented a revised methodology for the accession process in its communication entitled ‘Enhancing the accession process – A credible EU perspective for the Western Balkans’, which was endorsed by the Council. The Commission also presented an economic and investment plan for the Western Balkans for their recovery over the longer term following the COVID-19 crisis.
(10)
The Union and its Member States, in the Sofia Declaration of 17 May 2018 and the Zagreb Declaration of 6 May 2020, reaffirmed their unequivocal support for the European perspective of the Western Balkans as well as their engagement at all levels to support the region’s political, economic and social transformation. In the Zagreb Declaration, the Union and its Member States reiterated their strong solidarity with the Western Balkans partners, in particular in the context of the COVID-19 crisis.
(11)
The European Council has granted the status of candidate country to the Republic of Albania, Iceland, Montenegro, the Republic of North Macedonia, the Republic of Serbia and the Republic of Turkey. It confirmed the European perspective of the Western Balkans, based on the Stabilisation and Association Process which remains the common framework for relations with the Western Balkans. Without prejudice to positions on status or to any future decisions to be taken by the European Council or by the Council, those benefiting from such a European perspective which have not been granted candidate country status may be considered as potential candidates solely for the purposes of this Regulation. In March 2015, the Government of Iceland asked the Union to no longer consider Iceland a candidate country, without, however, officially withdrawing Iceland’s membership application.
(12)
Assistance should also be provided in compliance with the agreements concluded by the Union with the beneficiaries listed in Annex I. Assistance under this Regulation should mainly focus on assisting the beneficiaries listed in Annex I to strengthen democratic institutions and the rule of law, reform the judiciary and public administration, respect fundamental rights, including those of persons belonging to minorities, and promote gender equality, tolerance, social inclusion and non-discrimination, including in relation to persons in vulnerable situations, children or persons with disabilities. It should also support the development of a social market economy in line with the key principles and rights set out in the European Pillar of Social Rights solemnly proclaimed and signed on 17 November 2017 by the European Parliament, the Council and the Commission (6). It should not support actions that contribute to any form of segregation or social exclusion.
(13)
As good neighbourly relations and regional cooperation are essential elements of the enlargement process, assistance should also continue the support for the efforts of the beneficiaries listed in Annex I to advance regional, macro-regional and cross-border cooperation and territorial development, including through the implementation of Union macro-regional strategies. Those programmes should further contribute to the high visibility of assistance in the Union and in the beneficiaries listed in Annex I. Assistance under this Regulation should also enhance beneficiaries’ economic and social development and economic governance, foster economic integration with the Union single market, including customs cooperation, promote open and fair trade that underpins a smart, sustainable and inclusive growth agenda, including through the implementation of regional development and cohesion policies, agriculture and rural development policies, social and employment policies, including labour mobility, the development of the digital economy and society, and boost research and innovation, also in the context of the 2018 flagship initiative Digital Agenda for the Western Balkans.
(14)
Actions under IPA III should support reconciliation, peace-building and conflict prevention through mediation efforts, confidence-building measures and processes that promote justice, truth-seeking, reparations and guarantees of non-recurrence.
(15)
Assistance under this Regulation should be used to strengthen health security and preparedness for public health emergencies as well as to address, in complementarity with other Union instruments, the major economic shock generated by the COVID-19 outbreak and to mitigate its severe socioeconomic impact, by mobilising resources to accelerate the economic recovery of the region.
(16)
Special emphasis should be put on creating further opportunities for the youth, including for young professionals, while ensuring that such opportunities contribute to the socioeconomic development of the beneficiaries listed in Annex I. Assistance under this Regulation should also aim to tackle brain drain.
(17)
The Union’s efforts to support reform progress in the beneficiaries listed in Annex I through funding under IPA III should be well communicated by those beneficiaries as well as by the Union. In that regard, the Union should enhance communication and campaign efforts in order to ensure visibility of funding under IPA III.
(18)
The Union should provide support to the transition towards accession for the benefit of the beneficiaries listed in Annex I, drawing on the experience of the Member States. Such cooperation should focus particularly on the sharing of experience that was acquired by the Member States during their own reform processes.
(19)
Strengthening the rule of law, including the independence of the judiciary, the fight against corruption, money laundering and organised crime, as well as transparency, good governance at all levels, and public administration reform, including in the fields of public procurement, competition and State aid, remain key challenges and are essential for beneficiaries to come closer to the Union and to prepare to fully assume the obligations of Union membership. In view of the longer-term nature of the reforms pursued in those areas and the need to build up track records, financial assistance under this Regulation should address those issues as early as possible.
(20)
In accordance with the principle of participatory democracy, the Commission should encourage the strengthening of parliamentary capacities, parliamentary oversight, democratic procedures and fair representation in each beneficiary listed in Annex I.
(21)
Enhanced strategic and operational cooperation between the Union and the beneficiaries listed in Annex I on security is pivotal to addressing effectively and efficiently the threats of security, organised crime and terrorism.
(22)
Cooperation on migration at international and regional level, including further consolidating border and migration management capacities, ensuring access to international protection, sharing relevant information, enhancing border control and efforts to tackle irregular migration, addressing forced displacement and fighting against trafficking in human beings and people smuggling, is an important aspect of cooperation between the Union and the beneficiaries listed in Annex I.
(23)
The communication capacities of the beneficiaries listed in Annex I should be enhanced in order to ensure public support for and understanding of Union values and the benefits and obligations of potential Union membership, while addressing disinformation.
(24)
It is necessary that the Union lead the transition to a healthy planet and a more connected world. The European Green Deal as set out in the Commission communication of 11 December 2019 provides a renewed commitment and a new strategic framework to achieve that global objective. The Union should use its influence, expertise and financial assistance to mobilise the beneficiaries listed in Annex I to join it on a sustainable path. This Regulation should therefore promote the green agenda by reinforcing environmental protection, contributing to the mitigation of climate change and increasing resilience to climate change, and accelerating the shift towards a low-carbon economy.
(25)
The beneficiaries listed in Annex I need to be better prepared to address global challenges, such as sustainable development and climate change, and to align with the Union’s efforts to address those issues. Reflecting the importance of tackling climate change in line with the Union’s commitments to implement the Paris Agreement adopted under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (7) and the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals, IPA III should contribute to mainstreaming climate action in the Union’s policies and to the achievement of an overall target of 30 % of Union budget expenditure supporting climate objectives and the ambition of 7,5 % of the budget reflecting biodiversity expenditures in 2024 and 10 % in 2026 and 2027, while taking into account the existing overlaps between climate and biodiversity goals. Actions under IPA III are expected to contribute 18 % of the overall financial envelope of IPA III to climate objectives, with the objective of increasing this percentage to 20 % by 2027. Relevant actions are to be identified during the preparation and implementation of IPA III, and the overall contribution from IPA III should be considered in the relevant evaluations and review processes.
(26)
Actions under IPA III should support the implementation of the United Nations 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development adopted in September 2015 as a universal agenda, to which the Union and its Member States are fully committed and which all beneficiaries listed in Annex I have endorsed. In order to achieve those objectives, in addition to actions in which climate is one of the main objectives, actions under IPA III should, whenever possible, mainstream environmental sustainability and climate change objectives across all sectors, with particular attention to environmental protection and tackling cross-border pollution, and should pursue green growth in national and local strategies, including supporting sustainability criteria in public procurement. Actions under IPA III should be consistent with the principle of ‘do no harm’ and should comply with Union taxonomy to the extent possible, in particular to ensure the sustainability of investments in the Western Balkans and Turkey.
(27)
The implementation of this Regulation should be guided by the principles of gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls, and should seek to protect and promote women’s and girls’ rights in line with the EU Gender Action Plans and relevant Council conclusions and international conventions, including the Council conclusions on women, peace and security of 10 December 2018. Strengthening gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls in Union external action and increasing efforts to reach the minimum standards of performance indicated by the EU Gender Action Plans should lead to a gender-sensitive and transformative approach in the cooperation between the Union and the beneficiaries listed in Annex I. Gender equality should be reflected and mainstreamed throughout the implementation of this Regulation.
(28)
This Regulation lays down a financial envelope for the entire duration of IPA III, which is to constitute the prime reference amount, within the meaning of point 18 of the Interinstitutional Agreement of 16 December 2020 between the European Parliament, the Council of the European Union and the European Commission on budgetary discipline, on cooperation in budgetary matters and on sound financial management, as well as on new own resources, including a roadmap towards the introduction of new own resources (8), for the European Parliament and the Council during the annual budgetary procedure.
(29)
The Commission and the Member States should ensure the compliance, coherence, consistency and complementarity of their assistance, in particular through regular consultations and frequent exchanges of information during the different phases of the assistance cycle, including at local level. The necessary steps should also be taken to ensure better coordination and complementarity with other donors, including through regular consultations. The Commission should ensure that relevant stakeholders in the beneficiaries listed in Annex I, including civil society organisations and local and regional authorities, as appropriate, are duly consulted and have timely access to relevant information to allow them to play a meaningful role during the design and implementation of programmes and the related monitoring processes. The role of civil society should be enhanced in programmes implemented through government bodies and as a direct beneficiary of Union assistance. Likewise, Union assistance should also support human rights’ defenders.
(30)
The priorities of the actions aimed at achieving objectives in the relevant policy areas supported under this Regulation should be set out in a programming framework established by the Commission for the duration of the Union multiannual financial framework for the 2021-2027 period (‘IPA programming framework’). The IPA programming framework should be established in partnership with the beneficiaries listed in Annex I, in line with the overall policy framework and principles, as well as with the general and specific objectives laid down in this Regulation, and should take into due account relevant national strategies. The IPA programming framework should identify the areas to be supported through assistance with an indicative allocation for each area of support, including an estimate of climate-related expenditure.
(31)
It is in the common interest of the Union and the beneficiaries listed in Annex I to advance the efforts of those beneficiaries to reform their political, legal and economic systems with a view to Union membership. Assistance should be based both on a performance-based approach and the fair share principle, ensuring progress in all beneficiaries listed in Annex I. Assistance should be targeted and adjusted to their specific situations, taking into account any further efforts needed to meet the objectives of this Regulation. The needs and capacities of the beneficiaries listed in Annex I should be taken into account in accordance with the fair share principle in order to avoid a disproportionately low level of assistance as compared to other beneficiaries. Assistance under this Regulation should be differentiated in scope and intensity according to the performance of the beneficiaries listed in Annex I, in particular their commitment to and progress in implementing reforms, in particular in the field of the rule of law and fundamental rights, democratic institutions and public administration reform, economic development and competitiveness.
(32)
Where the relevant indicators show a significant regression or persistent lack of progress by a beneficiary listed in Annex I in the areas covered by the ‘fundamentals first’ approach, the scope and intensity of assistance should be modulated accordingly, without prejudice to the powers of the Council to adopt restrictive measures following a decision on the interruption or reduction, in part or completely, of economic and financial relations with one or more third countries in accordance with Article 215 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU) and without prejudice to the Commission’s power to suspend payments or the implementation of financing agreements in accordance with Regulation (EU, Euratom) 2018/1046 of the European Parliament and of the Council (9) (the ‘Financial Regulation’). Due consideration should be given to the respect by the beneficiaries of the principles of the United Nations Charter and international law.
(33)
The Commission should assess each year the implementation of the IPA programming framework, describing how the performance-based approach and the fair share principle were implemented. That assessment should also include the state of play of the level of funding for each objective, as well as for each beneficiary listed in Annex I. It should also allow the committee established by this Regulation to have adequate information to assist the Commission.
(34)
The Commission should ensure clear monitoring and evaluation mechanisms are in place in order to provide effective accountability and transparency in implementing the Union budget, and in order to ensure effective assessment of progress towards the achievement of this Regulation’s objectives. Whenever possible and appropriate, the results of the Union’s action should be monitored and evaluated on the basis of pre-defined, transparent, country-specific and measurable indicators, adapted to the specificities and objectives of IPA III.
(35)
The transition from the direct management of pre-accession funds by the Commission to indirect management by the beneficiaries should be progressive and in line with the respective capacities of those beneficiaries, having regard to principles of good governance. The Commission should take appropriate supervisory measures ensuring the protection of the financial interests of the Union, and be able, where necessary, to reverse that transition. Assistance should continue to make use of the structures and instruments that have proved their worth in the pre-accession process.
(36)
The Union should seek the most efficient use of available resources in order to optimise the impact of its external action. That should be achieved through coherence, consistency and complementarity with the Union’s external financing instruments, as well as through synergies with other Union policies and programmes, such as Horizon Europe – the Framework Programme for Research and Innovation – established by Regulation (EU) 2021/695 of the European Parliament and of the Council (10), Erasmus+ established by Regulation (EU) 2021/817 of the European Parliament and of the Council (11), the Creative Europe Programme established by Regulation (EU) 2021/818 of the European Parliament and of the Council (12), the European Green Deal, the Just Transition Fund established by Regulation (EU) 2021/1056 of the European Parliament and of the Council (13) and the Connecting Europe Facility established by Regulation (EU) 2021/1153 of the European Parliament and of the Council (14), including, where relevant, coherence and complementarity with macro-financial assistance.
(37)
In order to maximise the impact of combined interventions to achieve a common objective, IPA III should be able to contribute to actions under other programmes, as long as the contributions do not cover the same costs.
(38)
Union funding under IPA III should be used to finance actions under the international dimension of Erasmus+, the implementation of which should be carried out in accordance with Regulation (EU) 2021/817.
(39)
Horizontal financial rules adopted by the European Parliament and the Council on the basis of Article 322 TFEU apply to this Regulation. Those rules are laid down in the Financial Regulation and determine in particular the procedure for establishing and implementing the budget through grants, prizes, procurement and indirect management, and provide for checks on the responsibility of financial actors. Rules adopted on the basis of Article 322 TFEU also include a general regime of conditionality for the protection of the Union budget.
(40)
As the respect for democracy, human rights and the rule of law is essential for sound financial management and effective Union funding as referred to in the Financial Regulation, assistance could be suspended in the event of the degradation of democracy, human rights or the rule of law by a beneficiary listed in Annex I.
(41)
The types of financing and the methods of implementation under this Regulation should be chosen on the basis of their ability to achieve the specific objectives of the actions and to deliver results, taking into account, in particular, the costs of controls, administrative burdens, and the expected risk of non-compliance. That should include consideration of the use of lump sums, flat rates and unit costs, as well as financing not linked to costs as referred to in Article 125(1) of the Financial Regulation.
(42)
The Union should continue to apply common rules for the implementation of its external action. Rules and procedures for the implementation of the Union’s instruments for financing external action are laid down in Regulation (EU) 2021/947. Additional detailed provisions should be laid down to address specific situations, in particular for cross-border cooperation, agriculture and rural development policy areas.
(43)
External actions are often implemented in a highly volatile environment that requires continuous and rapid adaptation to the evolving needs of Union partners and to global challenges such as human rights, democracy and good governance, security and stability, climate change and environment, irregular migration and forced displacement and their root causes. Reconciling the principle of predictability with the need to react rapidly to new needs consequently means adapting the financial implementation of the programmes. To increase the ability of the Union to respond to unforeseen needs, while respecting the principle that the Union budget is set annually, this Regulation should preserve the flexibility allowed under the Financial Regulation to other policies, namely carry-overs and re-commitments of committed funds, while adhering to the goals and objectives laid down in this Regulation. This will ensure the efficient use of Union funds, both for Union citizens and for the beneficiaries listed in Annex I, thereby maximising the Union funds available for the Union’s external action interventions.
(44)
The new European Fund for Sustainable Development Plus (EFSD+) established by Regulation (EU) 2021/947, which builds on its predecessor, should constitute an integrated financial package supplying financing capacity in the form of grants, budgetary guarantees and other financial instruments worldwide, including to the beneficiaries listed in Annex I. The governance of the EFSD+ operations covering the Western Balkans carried out under this Regulation should be ensured by the Western Balkans Investment Framework (WBIF). The steering committee of the WBIF includes the beneficiaries from the Western Balkans listed in Annex I, the contributors to the European Western Balkans Joint Fund, relevant financial institutions and relevant regional organisations, as appropriate. The specific strategic board for the EFSD+ operations covering the Western Balkans should continue to be as inclusive.
(45)
The External Action Guarantee, established by Regulation (EU) 2021/947, supports the EFSD+ operations, and IPA III should contribute to the provisioning needs in respect of the operations to the benefit of the beneficiaries listed in Annex I, including the provisioning and liabilities arising from macro-financial assistance loans.
(46)
It is important to ensure that cross border cooperation programmes are implemented consistently with the framework established in the external action programmes and Regulation (EU) 2021/1059 of the European Parliament and of the Council (15). Specific co-financing provisions should be established in this Regulation.
(47)
Annual or multiannual action plans and measures referred to in this Regulation constitute work programmes under the Financial Regulation. Annual or multiannual action plans consist of a set of measures grouped into one document.
(48)
In accordance with the Financial Regulation, Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 883/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council (16) and Council Regulations (EC, Euratom) No 2988/95 (17), (Euratom, EC) No 2185/96 (18) and (EU) 2017/1939 (19), the financial interests of the Union are to be protected by means of proportionate measures, including measures relating to the prevention, detection, correction and investigation of irregularities, including fraud, to the recovery of funds lost, wrongly paid or incorrectly used, and, where appropriate, to the imposition of administrative penalties. In particular, in accordance with Regulations (Euratom, EC) No 2185/96 and (EU, Euratom) No 883/2013, the European Anti-Fraud Office (OLAF) has the power to carry out administrative investigations, including on-the-spot checks and inspections, with a view to establishing whether there has been fraud, corruption or any other illegal activity affecting the financial interests of the Union. The European Public Prosecutor’s Office (EPPO) is empowered, in accordance with Regulation (EU) 2017/1939, to investigate and prosecute criminal offences affecting the financial interests of the Union as provided for in Directive (EU) 2017/1371 of the European Parliament and of the Council (20). In accordance with the Financial Regulation, any person or entity receiving Union funds is to fully cooperate in the protection of the financial interests of the Union, grant the necessary rights and access to the Commission, OLAF, the Court of Auditors and, in respect of those Member States participating in enhanced cooperation pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2017/1939, the EPPO, and ensure that any third parties involved in the implementation of Union funds grant equivalent rights. Beneficiaries listed in Annex I should also report the irregularities including fraud which have been the subject of a primary administrative or judicial finding, without delay, to the Commission and keep the latter informed of the progress of administrative and legal proceeding. With the objective of alignment to good practices in Member States, this reporting should be done by electronic means, using the Irregularity Management System, established by the Commission.
(49)
Assistance under this Regulation should be implemented in a transparent, accountable and depoliticised manner. The Commission should monitor this closely, including at local level.
(50)
Communication fosters democratic debate, reinforces institutional control and scrutiny over Union funding, and contributes to boosting the credibility of the Union. The Union and the beneficiaries of Union funding should enhance the visibility of Union actions, and should communicate adequately the added value of Union support. In that regard, in accordance with the Financial Regulation, agreements concluded with recipients of Union funding should contain obligations to ensure appropriate visibility, and the Commission should act in an appropriate and timely manner when those obligations are not met.
(51)
In order to take account of any changes in the enlargement policy framework or of significant developments in the beneficiaries listed in Annex I, the power to adopt acts in accordance with Article 290 TFEU should be delegated to the Commission to adapt and update the thematic priorities for assistance listed in Annexes II and III as well as to adopt a delegated act to supplement this Regulation by setting out certain specific objectives and thematic priorities for assistance. It is of particular importance that the Commission carry out appropriate consultations during its preparatory work, including at expert level, and that those consultations be conducted in accordance with the principles laid down in the Interinstitutional Agreement of 13 April 2016 on Better Law-Making (21). In particular, to ensure equal participation in the preparation of delegated acts, the European Parliament and the Council receive all documents at the same time as Member States’ experts, and their experts systematically have access to meetings of Commission expert groups dealing with the preparation of delegated acts.
(52)
In order to ensure uniform conditions for the implementation of this Regulation, in particular on specific conditions and structures for indirect management with the beneficiaries listed in Annex I and on the implementation of rural development assistance, implementing powers should be conferred on the Commission. Those powers should be exercised in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 182/2011of the European Parliament and of the Council (22). When establishing the uniform conditions for implementing this Regulation, the lessons learnt from the management and implementation of past pre-accession assistance should be taken into account. Those uniform conditions should be amended if developments so require.
(53)
The committee established under this Regulation should be competent also for legal acts and commitments under Council Regulation (EC) No 1085/2006 (23) and Regulation (EU) No 231/2014, as well as for the implementation of Article 3 of Council Regulation (EC) No 389/2006 (24).
(54)
Since the objectives of this Regulation cannot be sufficiently achieved by the Member States but can be better achieved at Union level, the Union may adopt measures, in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity as set out in Article 5 TEU. In accordance with the principle of proportionality as set out in that Article, this Regulation does not go beyond what is necessary in order to achieve those objectives.
(55)
In order to ensure continuity in providing support in the relevant policy area and to allow implementation to start from the beginning of the multiannual financial framework 2021-2027, this Regulation should enter into force as a matter of urgency and should apply, with retroactive effect, from 1 January 2021,
HAVE ADOPTED THIS REGULATION:
