Article 7
IPA programming framework
1.   Assistance under this Regulation shall be based on an IPA programming framework for the delivery of the specific objectives referred to in Article 3(2) and the thematic priorities referred to in Article 3(3) and further set out in Annexes II and III. The Commission shall establish the IPA programming framework for the duration of the 2021-2027 MFF.
2.   The European Parliament and the Council shall authorise the annual appropriations within the limits of the 2021-2027 MFF.
3.   The IPA programming framework shall be developed in accordance with the policy framework and general principles set out in Article 6 and shall take relevant national strategies and sector policies into due account.
4.   The IPA programming framework shall include indicative allocations of Union funds for thematic areas in accordance with the specific objectives referred to in Article 3(2), as applicable, broken down by year, without prejudice to the possibility of combining assistance contributing to the achievement of different specific objectives.
5.   The IPA programming framework shall include indicators for assessing progress towards the achievement of the specific objectives referred to in Article 3(2). Those indicators shall be coherent with the key performance indicators referred to in Annex IV.
6.   The Commission shall carry out an annual assessment of the implementation of the IPA programming framework in light of the evolution of the policy framework referred to in Article 6 and based on the indicators referred to in paragraph 5 of this Article. That assessment shall also include the state of play of the allocations committed and planned for beneficiaries listed in Annex I and how the performance-based approach and the fair share principle referred to in Article 8 have been implemented. The Commission shall submit that assessment to the committee referred to in Article 17.
7.   On the basis of the annual assessment referred to in paragraph 6, the Commission may propose to revise the IPA programming framework as appropriate. Furthermore, the Commission may review the IPA programming framework following the mid-term evaluation referred to in Article 42 of Regulation (EU) 2021/947 and, where appropriate, may revise it. Any revision of the IPA programming framework shall be carried out in accordance with the procedure referred to in paragraph 8.
8.   Without prejudice to paragraph 9, the Commission shall adopt the IPA programming framework by means of an implementing act. That implementing act shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 17(3).
9.   The Commission shall adopt the programming framework for cross-border cooperation with Member States in accordance with Article 17(3).
