Article 5
Cross-programme provisions
1.   In implementing this Regulation, consistency, synergies and complementarities with other areas of the Union’s external action and with other relevant Union policies and programmes, and policy coherence for development shall be ensured.
2.   Regulation (EU) 2021/947 shall apply to activities implemented under this Regulation where it is referred to in this Regulation.
3.   IPA III shall contribute funds to actions implemented and managed in accordance with Regulation (EU) 2021/817. Regulation (EU) 2021/817 applies to the use of those funds. To that end, the contribution of IPA III shall be included in the single programming document referred to in Article 13(6) of Regulation (EU) 2021/947 and adopted in accordance with the procedures laid down in that Regulation. That programming document shall contain an indicative minimum amount to be allocated to actions established under Regulation (EU) 2021/817.
4.   Assistance under this Regulation may be provided to the type of actions provided for under the European Regional Development Fund and the Cohesion Fund the specific objectives and scope of support of which are set out in Regulation (EU) 2021/1058 of the European Parliament and of the Council (25), the European Social Fund Plus established by Regulation (EU) 2021/1057 of the European Parliament and of the Council (26) and the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development to be established by a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing rules on support for strategic plans to be drawn up by Member States under the Common agricultural policy (CAP Strategic Plans) and financed by the European Agricultural Guarantee Fund (EAGF) and by the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development (EAFRD) and repealing Regulation (EU) No 1305/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council and Regulation (EU) No 1307/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council.
5.   The European Regional Development Fund shall contribute to programmes or measures established for cross-border cooperation between the beneficiaries listed in Annex I and one or more Member States. The Commission shall adopt those programmes and measures in accordance with Article 17(3) of this Regulation. The amount of the contribution from IPA III funds allocated to cross-border cooperation (‘IPA III-CBC’), as referred to in Article 10(3) of Regulation (EU) 2021/1059, shall be determined in accordance with that Article. IPA III-CBC programmes shall be managed in accordance with Regulation (EU) 2021/1059.
6.   IPA III may contribute to transnational and interregional cooperation programmes or measures that are established and implemented under Regulation (EU) 2021/1059, taking into account macro-regional strategies or sea basin strategies, where applicable, and in which the beneficiaries listed in Annex I to this Regulation participate.
Where a transnational and interregional cooperation programme or measure is also supported by NDICI, pre-financing shall be paid in accordance with Article 22(5) of Regulation (EU) 2021/947.
7.   Where appropriate, other Union programmes may contribute to actions established under this Regulation in accordance with Article 9, provided that the contributions do not cover the same costs. This Regulation may also contribute to measures established under other Union programmes, provided that the contributions do not cover the same costs. In such cases, the work programme covering those actions shall establish which set of rules shall be applicable.
8.   To ensure the coherence and effectiveness of Union financing or to foster regional cooperation, the Commission may, where duly justified, decide to extend the eligibility of action plans and measures referred to in Article 9(1) to countries, territories or regions which would not otherwise be eligible for financing pursuant to Article 3(1), provided that the plan or measure to be implemented is of a global, regional or cross-border nature.
