Article 6
Policy framework and general principles
1.   The enlargement policy framework defined by the European Council and the Council, the agreements that establish a legally binding relationship with the beneficiaries listed in Annex I, as well as resolutions of the European Parliament, communications of the Commission and joint communications of the Commission and the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, shall constitute the overall policy framework for the implementation of this Regulation. The Commission shall ensure coherence between the assistance under this Regulation and the enlargement policy framework.
2.   Programmes and actions under IPA III in pursuit of the specific objectives referred to in Article 3(2) shall mainstream the horizontal priorities of climate change, environmental protection, human rights and gender equality, in order to promote integrated actions that create co-benefits and meet multiple objectives in a coherent way. Where applicable, programmes and actions shall address interlinkages between Sustainable Development Goals, including the goals of promoting peaceful and inclusive societies, as well as of poverty reduction.
3.   The Commission, in liaison with Member States, shall contribute to the implementation of Union commitments to increased transparency and accountability in the delivery of assistance, including by making information on assistance volume and allocation available through web-based databases, and shall ensure that data is comparable and can be easily accessed, shared and published.
4.   The Commission and the Member States shall cooperate in ensuring coherence and shall strive to avoid duplication between assistance under this Regulation and other assistance provided by the Union, the Member States and the European Investment Bank Group, in line with the established principles for strengthening operational coordination in the field of external assistance, including through enhanced coordination with Member States at local level and through the harmonisation of policies and procedures, in particular the international principles on development effectiveness. Such coordination shall involve regular and timely consultations, frequent exchanges of information during the different phases of the assistance cycle, shall involve inclusive meetings aimed at coordinating the assistance, including at local level, and shall constitute a key step in the programming processes of the Union and the Member States.
5.   In line with the principle of inclusive partnership, where appropriate, the Commission shall ensure that relevant stakeholders in the beneficiaries listed in Annex I, including civil society organisations and local and regional authorities, as appropriate, are duly consulted and have timely access to relevant information to allow them to play a meaningful role during the design and implementation of programmes and the related monitoring processes. The Commission shall encourage coordination among the relevant stakeholders.
The capacities of civil society organisations shall be strengthened, including their capacities as direct beneficiaries of assistance, where appropriate.
6.   The Commission, in liaison with the Member States, shall take the necessary steps to ensure coordination and complementarity with multilateral and regional organisations and entities, such as international organisations and financial institutions, and agencies and non-Union donors.
