Article 8
Assistance to beneficiaries, performance assessment and fair share principle
1.   Assistance under this Regulation shall be based both on a performance-based approach and the fair share principle, as set out in paragraphs 2, 3 and 4.
2.   Assistance shall aim to ensure progress with respect to all the beneficiaries listed in Annex I and shall be targeted and adjusted to their specific situations, taking into account any further efforts needed to meet the objectives of this Regulation. The needs and capacities of those beneficiaries shall be taken into account in accordance with the fair share principle in order to avoid a disproportionately low level of assistance as compared to other beneficiaries.
3.   Assistance shall be differentiated in scope and intensity according to performance of the beneficiaries listed in Annex I, in particular as regards their commitment to and progress in implementing reforms, as well as according to their needs.
4.   In assessing the performance of the beneficiaries listed in Annex I and deciding on the assistance to be provided, particular attention shall be paid to the efforts made in the fields of the rule of law and fundamental rights, democratic institutions and public administration reform, as well as economic development and competitiveness.
5.   In the case of a significant regression or persistent lack of progress by a beneficiary listed in Annex I in the areas referred to in paragraph 4 of this Article as measured by the indicators referred to in Article 7(5), the scope and intensity of assistance shall be modulated accordingly, in accordance with paragraph 6, including by reducing the funds proportionally and redirecting them in ways that avoid compromising support for improving fundamental rights, democracy and the rule of law, including support to civil society and, where appropriate, cooperation with local authorities. Where progress has resumed, the assistance shall also be modulated accordingly in accordance with paragraph 6 to further support those efforts.
6.   Assistance to the beneficiaries listed in Annex I shall be decided in the framework of measures referred to in Article 9.
