Article 12
Financial instruments and guarantee for external actions
1.   In accordance with Article 31(7) of Regulation (EU) 2021/947, the beneficiaries listed in Annex I to this Regulation shall be eligible for support through the European Fund for Sustainable Development Plus (EFSD+) and the External Action Guarantee (EAG). EFSD+ and EAG operations shall be financed under this Regulation as provided for in Chapter IV of Title II of Regulation (EU) 2021/947 mutatis mutandis, subject to the special provisions of this Article.
2.   The Commission shall be advised by a specific strategic board in the management of the EFSD+ operations for the Western Balkans (‘strategic board’).
3.   The strategic board shall advise the Commission on the strategic orientation of investments for the Western Balkans under EFSD+, and contribute to their alignment with the guiding principles, policy framework and objectives set out in this Regulation.
The strategic board shall support the Commission in setting overall investment goals for the Western Balkans as regards the use of the EAG to support EFSD+ operations and shall monitor an appropriate and diversified thematic coverage for investment windows.
4.   The strategic board shall include representatives of the Commission, all Member States and the European Investment Bank (EIB).
The European Parliament shall have observer status. Participation in the strategic board may be open to other relevant stakeholders. The strategic board shall decide on the inclusion of any new member or observer.
Without prejudice to specific arrangements on co-chairing, the strategic board shall be chaired by the Commission, and shall, to the extent possible, adopt opinions by consensus.
Participation in the meetings of the strategic board shall be voluntary.
5.   Before the first meeting of the strategic board, the Commission shall propose the rules of procedure for adoption by the strategic board, including rules on participation of representatives in the Western Balkans Investment Framework, the role of observers and on the designation of co-chairs.
The minutes and agendas of the meetings of the strategic board shall be made public following their adoption.
6.   The Commission shall report every year to the strategic board about the progress made in respect of the implementation of the operations covering the Western Balkans.
