Article 3
Amendment of Directive 2012/19/EU
Directive 2012/19/EU is amended as follows:
(1)
Article 16 is amended as follows:
(a)
paragraph 5 is deleted;
(b)
the following paragraphs are added:
‘6.   Member States shall report the data concerning the implementation of paragraph 4 for each calendar year to the Commission.
They shall report the data electronically within 18 months of the end of the reporting year for which the data are collected. The data shall be reported in the format established by the Commission in accordance with paragraph 9.
The first reporting period shall start in the first full calendar year after the adoption of the implementing act that establishes the format for reporting, in accordance with paragraph 9, and it shall cover the data for that reporting period.
7.   The data reported by Member States in accordance with paragraph 6 shall be accompanied by a quality check report.
8.   The Commission shall review the data reported in accordance with paragraph 6 and publish a report on the results of its review. The report shall assess the organisation of the data collection, the sources of data and the methodology used in Member States as well as the completeness, reliability, timeliness and consistency of that data. The assessment may include specific recommendations for improvement. The report shall be drawn up after the first reporting of the data by the Member States and every four years thereafter.
9.   The Commission shall adopt implementing acts laying down the format for reporting the data referred to in paragraph 6 of this Article. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 21(2).’;
(2)
the following article is inserted:
‘Article 16a
Incentives for the application of the waste hierarchy
In order to contribute to the objectives laid down in this Directive, Member States may make use of economic instruments and other measures to provide incentives for the application of the waste hierarchy, such as those indicated in Annex IVa to Directive 2008/98/EC or other appropriate instruments and measures.’;
(3)
in Article 19, the first paragraph is replaced by the following:
‘The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 20 of this Directive concerning the amendments necessary in order to adapt Annexes IV, VII, VIII and IX to this Directive to scientific and technical progress. The Commission shall adopt a separate delegated act in respect of each Annex to be amended. When amending Annex VII to this Directive, the exemptions granted under Directive 2011/65/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council (*5) shall be taken into consideration.

(*5)  Directive 2011/65/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 8 June 2011 on the restriction of the use of certain hazardous substances in electrical and electronic equipment (OJ L 174, 1.7.2011, p. 88).’."
                        
