Article 21
Collection and identification as regards category and transport
1.   Operators shall collect, identify and transport animal by-products without undue delay under conditions which prevent risks arising to public and animal health.
2.   Operators shall ensure that animal by-products and derived products are accompanied during transport by a commercial document or, when required by this Regulation or by a measure adopted in accordance with paragraph 6, by a health certificate.
By way of derogation from the first subparagraph, the competent authority may authorise the transport of manure between two points located on the same farm or between farms and users of manure within the same Member State without a commercial document or health certificate.
3.   Commercial documents and health certificates accompanying animal by-products or derived products during transport shall at least include information on the origin, the destination and the quantity of such products, and a description of the animal by-products or derived products and their marking, when such marking is required by this Regulation.
However, for animal by-products and derived products transported within the territory of a Member State, the competent authority of the Member State concerned may authorise transmission of the information referred to in the first subparagraph by way of an alternative system.
4.   Operators shall collect, transport and dispose of Category 3 catering waste, in accordance with national measures foreseen in Article 13 of Directive 2008/98/EC.
5.   The following shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure referred to in Article 52(3):
(a)
models for commercial documents which are required to accompany animal by-products during transport; and
(b)
models for health certificates and the conditions governing the way they must accompany animal by-products and derived products during transport.
6.   Measures for the implementation of this Article may be laid down relating to the following:
(a)
cases where a health certificate is required, having regard to the level of risk to public and animal health arising from certain derived products;
(b)
cases where, by way of derogation from the first subparagraph of paragraph 2 and having regard to the low level of risk to public and animal health arising from certain animal by-products or derived products, transport of derived products may take place without the documents or certificates referred to in that paragraph;
(c)
requirements for the identification, including labelling, and for the separation of different categories of animal by-products during transport; and
(d)
conditions to prevent risks to public and animal health arising during the collection and transport of animal by-products, including conditions for the safe transport of those products with respect to containers, vehicles and packaging material.
Those measures, designed to amend non-essential elements of this Regulation by supplementing it, shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 52(4).
