Article 3
Definitions
For the purposes of this Regulation, the following definitions shall apply:
1.
‘animal by-products’ means entire bodies or parts of animals, products of animal origin or other products obtained from animals, which are not intended for human consumption, including oocytes, embryos and semen;
2.
‘derived products’ means products obtained from one or more treatments, transformations or steps of processing of animal by-products;
3.
‘products of animal origin’ means products of animal origin as defined in point 8.1 of Annex I to Regulation (EC) No 853/2004;
4.
‘carcase’ means carcase as defined in point 1.9 of Annex I to Regulation (EC) No 853/2004;
5.
‘animal’ means any invertebrate or vertebrate animal;
6.
‘farmed animal’ means:
(a)
any animal that is kept, fattened or bred by humans and used for the production of food, wool, fur, feathers, hides and skins or any other product obtained from animals or for other farming purposes;
(b)
equidae;
7.
‘wild animal’ means any animal not kept by humans;
8.
‘pet animal’ means any animal belonging to species normally nourished and kept but not consumed, by humans for purposes other than farming;
9.
‘aquatic animals’ means aquatic animals as defined in Article 3(1)(e) of Directive 2006/88/EC;
10.
‘competent authority’ means the central authority of a Member State competent to ensure compliance with the requirements of this Regulation or any authority to which that competence has been delegated; it also includes, where appropriate, the corresponding authority of a third country;
11.
‘operator’ means the natural or legal persons having an animal by-product or derived product under their actual control, including carriers, traders and users;
12.
‘user’ means the natural or legal persons using animal by-products and derived products for special feeding purposes, for research or for other specific purposes;
13.
‘establishment’ or ‘plant’ means any place where any operation involving the handling of animal by-products or derived products is carried out, other than a fishing vessel;
14.
‘placing on the market’ means any operation the purpose of which is to sell animal by-products or derived products to a third party in the Community or any other form of supply against payment or free of charge to such a third party or storage with a view to supply to such a third party;
15.
‘transit’ means movement through the Community from the territory of a third country to the territory of another third country, other than by sea or by air;
16.
‘export’ means movement from the Community to a third country;
17.
‘transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (TSEs)’ means all transmissible spongiform encephalopathies as defined in Article 3(1)(a) of Regulation (EC) No 999/2001;
18.
‘specified risk material’ means specified risk material as defined in Article 3(1)(g) of Regulation (EC) No 999/2001;
19.
‘pressure sterilisation’ means the processing of animal by-products, after reduction in particle size to not more than 50 mm, to a core temperature of more than 133 °C for at least 20 minutes without interruption at an absolute pressure of at least 3 bar;
20.
‘manure’ means any excrement and/or urine of farmed animals other than farmed fish, with or without litter;
21.
‘authorised landfill’ means a landfill for which a permit has been issued in accordance with Directive 1999/31/EC;
22.
‘organic fertiliser’ and ‘soil improver’ means materials of animal origin used to maintain or improve plant nutrition and the physical and chemical properties and biological activities of soils, either separately or together; they may include manure, non-mineralised guano, digestive tract content, compost and digestion residues;
23.
‘remote area’ means an area where the animal population is so small, and where disposal establishments or plants are so far away that the arrangements necessary for the collection and transport of animal by-products would be unacceptably onerous compared to local disposal;
24.
‘food’ or ‘foodstuff’ means food or foodstuff as defined in Article 2 of Regulation (EC) No 178/2002;
25.
‘feed’ or ‘feedingstuff’ means feed or feedingstuff as defined in Article 3(4) of Regulation (EC) No 178/2002;
26.
‘centrifuge or separator sludge’ means material collected as a by-product after purification of raw milk and separation of skimmed milk and cream from raw milk;
27.
‘waste’ means waste as defined in point 1 of Article 3 of Directive 2008/98/EC.
