Article 6
Rights and obligations of toll chargers
1.   Where an EETS domain does not comply with the technical and procedural EETS interoperability conditions provided for in this Directive, the Member State on whose territory the EETS domain lies shall take the measures necessary to ensure that the responsible toll charger assesses the problem with the stakeholders concerned and, if within its sphere of responsibilities, takes remedial actions with a view to ensuring EETS interoperability of the toll system. Where necessary, the Member State shall update the register referred to in Article 21(1) in respect of the information referred to in point (a) thereof.
2.   Each Member State shall take the measures necessary to ensure that any toll charger responsible for an EETS domain on the territory of that Member State develops and maintains an EETS domain statement setting out the general conditions for EETS providers for accessing their EETS domains, in accordance with the implementing acts referred to in paragraph 9.
Where a new electronic road toll system is created on the territory of a Member State, that Member State shall take the measures necessary to ensure that the designated toll charger responsible for the system publishes the EETS domain statement with sufficient notice to allow for an accreditation of interested EETS providers at the latest one month before the operational launch of the new system, with due regard to the length of the process of assessment of conformity to specifications and of the suitability for use of interoperability constituents referred to in Article 15(1).
Where an electronic road toll system on the territory of a Member State is substantially modified, that Member State shall take the measures necessary to ensure that the toll charger responsible for the system publishes the updated EETS domain statement with sufficient notice to allow already accredited EETS providers to adapt their interoperability constituents to the new requirements and to obtain re-accreditation at the latest one month before the operational launch of the modified system, giving due regard to the length of the process of assessment of the conformity to specifications and of the suitability for use of interoperability constituents referred to in Article 15(1).
3.   Member States shall take the measures necessary to ensure that toll chargers responsible for EETS domains on their territory accept on a non-discriminatory basis any EETS provider requesting to provide EETS on the said EETS domains.
Acceptance of an EETS provider in a EETS domain shall be subject to the provider's compliance with the obligations and general conditions set out in the EETS domain statement.
Member States shall take the measures necessary to ensure that toll chargers do not require EETS providers to use specific technical solutions, or processes, that hinder the interoperability of an EETS provider's interoperability constituents with electronic road toll systems in other EETS domains.
If a toll charger and an EETS provider cannot reach an agreement, the matter may be referred to the Conciliation Body responsible for the relevant toll domain.
4.   Each Member State shall take the measures necessary to ensure that the contracts between the toll charger and the EETS provider, regarding the provision of EETS on the territory of that Member State, permit the invoice for the toll to be issued to the EETS user directly by the EETS provider.
The toll charger may require that the EETS provider invoices the user in the name and on behalf of the toll charger, and the EETS provider shall comply with that request.
5.   The toll charged by toll chargers to EETS users shall not exceed the corresponding national or local toll. This is without prejudice to the right of Member States to introduce rebates or discounts to promote the use of electronic toll payments. All OBE user rebates or discounts on tolls offered by a Member State or by a toll charger shall be transparent, publicly announced and available under the same conditions to clients of EETS providers.
6.   Member States shall take the measures necessary to ensure that toll chargers accept on their EETS domains any operational OBE from EETS providers with whom they have contractual relationships which have been certified in accordance with the procedure defined in the implementing acts referred to in Article 15(7) and which do not appear on a list of invalidated OBE referred to in Article 5(5).
7.   In the event of an EETS dysfunction attributable to the toll charger, the toll charger shall provide for a degraded mode of service enabling vehicles with the equipment referred to in paragraph 6 to circulate safely with a minimum of delay and without being suspected of a failure to pay a road fee.
8.   Member States shall take the measures necessary to ensure that toll chargers collaborate in a non-discriminatory way with EETS providers or manufacturers or notified bodies with a view to assessing the suitability for use of interoperability constituents on their EETS domains.
9.   The Commission shall adopt implementing acts, at the latest by 19 October 2019, to lay down the minimum content of the EETS domain statement, including:
(a)
the requirements for EETS providers;
(b)
the procedural conditions, including commercial conditions;
(c)
the procedure of accreditation of EETS providers; and
(d)
the toll context data.
Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 31(2).
