Article 5
Rights and obligations of EETS providers
1.   Member States shall take the measures necessary to ensure that EETS providers whom they have registered conclude EETS contracts covering all EETS domains on the territories of at least four Member States within the 36 months following their registration in accordance with Article 4. They shall take the measures necessary to ensure that that those EETS providers conclude contracts covering all EETS domains in a given Member State within the 24 months following the conclusion of the first contract in that Member State, except for those EETS domains in which the responsible toll chargers do not comply with Article 6(3).
2.   Member States shall take the measures necessary to ensure that EETS providers whom they have registered maintain at all times the coverage of all EETS domains once they have concluded contracts therefor. They shall take the measures necessary to ensure that, where an EETS provider is not able to maintain coverage of an EETS domain because the toll charger does not comply with this Directive, it re-establishes the coverage of the concerned domain as soon as possible.
3.   Member States shall take the measures necessary to ensure that EETS providers whom they have registered publish information on their EETS domains coverage and any changes thereto, as well as, within one month of registration, detailed plans regarding any extension of their service to further EETS domains, with annual updates.
4.   Member States shall take the measures necessary to ensure that, where necessary, EETS providers whom they have registered, or who provide the EETS on their territory, provide EETS users with OBE which fulfils the requirements set out in this Directive, as well as in Directives 2014/53/EU (13) and 2014/30/EU (14) of the European Parliament and of the Council. They may request from concerned EETS providers evidence that those requirements are fulfilled.
5.   Member States shall take the measures necessary to ensure that EETS providers who provide the EETS on their territory keep lists of invalidated OBE related to their EETS contracts with the EETS users. They shall take the measures necessary to ensure that such lists are maintained in strict compliance with the Union rules on the protection of personal data as set out, inter alia, in Regulation (EU) 2016/679 and Directive 2002/58/EC.
6.   Member States shall take the measures necessary to ensure that EETS providers whom they registered make public their contracting policy towards EETS users.
7.   Member States shall take the measures necessary to ensure that EETS providers who provide the EETS on their territory provide toll chargers with the information they need to calculate and apply the toll on the vehicles of EETS users or provide toll chargers with all information necessary to allow them to verify the calculation of applied toll on the vehicles of EETS users by the EETS providers.
8.   Member States shall take the measures necessary to ensure that EETS providers who provide the EETS on their territory cooperate with toll chargers in their efforts to identify suspected offenders. Member States shall take the measures necessary to ensure that, where a failure to pay a road fee is suspected, the toll charger is able to obtain, from the EETS provider, the data relating to the vehicle involved in the suspected failure to pay a road fee and to the owner or holder of that vehicle who is a client of the EETS provider. Such data shall be made available instantly by the EETS provider.
Member States shall take the measures necessary to ensure that the toll charger does not disclose such data to any other toll service provider. They shall take the measures necessary to ensure that, where the toll charger is integrated with a toll service provider in one entity, the data are used for the sole purpose of identifying suspected offenders, or in accordance with Article 27(3).
9.   Member States shall take the measures necessary to ensure that a toll charger responsible for an EETS domain on their territory is able to obtain, from an EETS provider, data relating to all vehicles owned or held by clients of the EETS provider, which have, in a given period of time, driven on the EETS domain for which the toll charger is responsible, as well as data relating to the owners or holders of these vehicles, provided that the toll charger needs this data to comply with its obligations to tax authorities. Member States shall take the measures necessary to ensure that the EETS provider provides the requested data no later than two days after receiving the request. They shall take the measures necessary to ensure that the toll charger does not disclose such data to any other toll service provider. They shall take the measures necessary to ensure that, where the toll charger is integrated with a toll service provider in one entity, the data are used for the sole purpose of compliance by the toll charger with its obligations to tax authorities.
10.   The data provided by EETS providers to toll chargers shall be processed in compliance with Union rules on the protection of personal data as set out in Regulation (EU) 2016/679, as well as with the national laws, regulations or administrative provisions transposing Directives 2002/58/EC and (EU) 2016/680.
11.   The Commission shall adopt implementing acts, at the latest by 19 October 2019, to further define the obligations of the EETS providers regarding:
(a)
monitoring the performance of their service level, and cooperation with toll chargers in verification audits;
(b)
cooperation with toll chargers in the performance of toll chargers' systems' tests;
(c)
service and technical support to EETS users and personalisation of OBE;
(d)
the invoicing of EETS users;
(e)
the information which EETS providers must provide to toll chargers and which is referred to in paragraph 7; and
(f)
informing the EETS user of a detected toll non-declaration situation.
Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 31(2).
