Article 8
Tolls
1.   Member States shall take the measures necessary to ensure that where, for the purpose of establishing the toll tariff applicable to a given vehicle, there is discrepancy between the vehicle classification used by the EETS provider and the toll charger, the toll charger's classification prevails, unless an error can be demonstrated.
2.   Member States shall take the measures necessary to ensure that the toll charger is entitled to require, from an EETS provider, payment for any substantiated toll declaration and any substantiated toll non-declaration relating to any EETS user account managed by that EETS provider.
3.   Member States shall take the measures necessary to ensure that, where an EETS provider has sent to a toll charger a list of invalidated OBE referred to in Article 5(5), the EETS provider shall not be held liable for any further toll incurred through the use of such invalidated OBE. The number of entries in the list of invalidated OBE, the list's format and its updating frequency shall be agreed between toll chargers and EETS providers.
4.   Member States shall take the measures necessary to ensure that, in microwave-based toll systems, toll chargers communicate to EETS providers substantiated toll declarations for tolls incurred by their respective EETS users.
5.   The Commission shall adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 30, at the latest by 19 October 2019, to lay down the details for the classification of vehicles for the purposes of establishing the applicable tariff schemes, including any procedures necessary for establishing such schemes. The set of vehicle classification parameters to be supported by EETS shall not restrict the choice of tariff schemes by toll chargers. The Commission shall ensure sufficient flexibility to allow the set of classification parameters to be supported by EETS to evolve according to foreseeable future needs. Those acts shall be without prejudice to the definition, in Directive 1999/62/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (15), of the parameters according to which tolls shall vary.
