Article 12
Obligations of importers
1.   Importers shall place only compliant radio equipment on the market.
2.   Before placing radio equipment on the market importers shall ensure that the appropriate conformity assessment procedure referred to in Article 17 has been carried out by the manufacturer and that the radio equipment is so constructed that it can be operated in at least one Member State without infringing applicable requirements on the use of radio spectrum. They shall ensure that the manufacturer has drawn up the technical documentation, that the radio equipment bears the CE marking and is accompanied by the information and documents referred to in Article 10(8), (9) and (10), and that the manufacturer has complied with the requirements set out in Article 10(6) and (7).
Where an importer considers or has reason to believe that radio equipment is not in conformity with the essential requirements set out in Article 3, he shall not place the radio equipment on the market until it has been brought into conformity. Furthermore, where the radio equipment presents a risk, the importer shall inform the manufacturer and the market surveillance authorities to that effect.
3.   Importers shall indicate on the radio equipment their name, registered trade name or registered trade mark and the postal address at which they can be contacted or, where that is not possible, on its packaging or in a document accompanying the radio equipment. This includes cases where the size of radio equipment does not allow it, or where importers would have to open the packaging in order to indicate their name and address on the radio equipment. The contact details shall be in a language easily understood by end-users and market surveillance authorities.
4.   Importers shall ensure that the radio equipment is accompanied by instructions and safety information in a language which can be easily understood by consumers and other end-users, as determined by the Member State concerned.
5.   Importers shall ensure that, while radio equipment is under their responsibility, its storage or transport conditions do not jeopardise its compliance with the essential requirements set out in Article 3.
6.   When deemed appropriate with regard to the risks presented by radio equipment, importers shall, to protect the health and safety of end-users, carry out sample testing of radio equipment made available on the market, investigate, and, if necessary, keep a register of complaints, of non-conforming radio equipment and radio equipment recalls, and shall keep distributors informed of any such monitoring.
7.   Importers who consider or have reason to believe that radio equipment which they have placed on the market is not in conformity with this Directive shall immediately take the corrective measures necessary to bring that radio equipment into conformity, to withdraw it or recall it, if appropriate. Furthermore, where the radio equipment presents a risk, importers shall immediately inform the competent national authorities of the Member States in which they made the radio equipment available on the market to that effect, giving details, in particular, of the non-compliance and of any corrective measures taken.
8.   Importers shall, for 10 years after the radio equipment has been placed on the market, keep a copy of the EU declaration of conformity at the disposal of the market surveillance authorities and ensure that the technical documentation can be made available to those authorities, upon request.
9.   Importers shall, further to a reasoned request from a competent national authority, provide it with all the information and documentation in paper or electronic form necessary to demonstrate the conformity of radio equipment in a language which can be easily understood by that authority. They shall cooperate with that authority, at its request, on any action taken to eliminate the risks posed by radio equipment which they have placed on the market.
