Article 10
Quality requirements and quality reporting
1.   Member States shall take the necessary measures to ensure the quality of the data and metadata transmitted.
2.   Member States shall ensure that the data obtained using the sources and methods laid down in Article 8 give accurate estimates on the statistical population defined in Article 3 at national level, and, where required, at regional level.
3.   For the purpose of this Regulation, the quality criteria defined in Article 12(1) of Regulation (EC) No 223/2009 shall apply.
4.   The Commission (Eurostat) shall assess the quality of the data and metadata transmitted to it in a transparent and verifiable way.
5.   For the purpose of paragraph 4, each Member State shall transmit to the Commission (Eurostat), for the first time by 30 June 2028, and every three years thereafter, quality reports describing the statistical processes for the data sets transmitted during the period, including in particular:
(a)
metadata describing the methodology used and how technical specifications were achieved by reference to those laid down by this Regulation;
(b)
information on compliance with the coverage requirements set out in Article 4, including their development and update.
6.   By way of derogation from paragraph 5 of this Article, for the topic of agricultural price indices referred to in Article 5(1), point (c)(i), the quality reports shall be transmitted every five years together with the weights and rebased indices, as well as the corresponding separate methodological reports. The first transmission for the quality report on the topic of agricultural price indices shall not be before 31 December 2028.
7.   The Commission may adopt implementing acts setting out the practical arrangements for the quality reports and their contents. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 19(2) and shall not impose a significant additional burden or costs on the Member States.
8.   Member States shall, where necessary, inform the Commission (Eurostat) about any relevant information or changes with regard to the implementation of this Regulation that could significantly influence the quality of the transmitted data.
9.   At the request of the Commission (Eurostat), Member States shall provide necessary additional clarification to evaluate the quality of the statistical data.
