Article 4
Coverage requirements
1.   The statistics shall be representative of the statistical population that they describe.
2.   For the domain of animal production statistics as referred to in Article 5(1), point (a), the data shall cover 95 % of the livestock units of each Member State and the related activities or outputs.
3.   For the domain of crop production statistics as referred to in Article 5(1), point (b), the data shall cover 95 % of the total utilised agricultural area, excluding kitchen gardens, of each Member State and the related production volumes.
4.   For the topic of nutrients in fertilisers for agriculture referred to in Article 5(1), point (d)(i), of this Regulation, the data shall cover the fertilising products as defined in Article 2, point (1) of Regulation (EU) 2019/1009 of the European Parliament and of the Council (22) and 95 % of the total utilised agricultural area, excluding kitchen gardens, of each Member State and the related production volumes.
5.   For the domain of statistics on plant protection products as referred to in Article 5(1), point (e), the coverage shall be as follows:
(a)
for the detailed topic of plant protection products placed on the market as referred to in the Annex to this Regulation, the data shall cover all plant protection products placed on the market as defined in Article 3, point 9, of Regulation (EC) No 1107/2009;
(b)
for the detailed topic of use of plant protection products in agriculture as referred to in the Annex to this Regulation, the data shall cover at least 85 % of the use in an agricultural activity by professional users as defined in Article 3, point (1) of Directive 2009/128/EC, in each Member State. The data from each Member State shall relate to a list of crops containing a common part for all Member States. That common part, together with the permanent grasslands, shall cover at least 75 % of the total utilised agricultural area at Union level. As soon as Union legislation requiring professional users of plant protection products to transmit their records on the use of such products in electronic format to national competent authorities becomes applicable, the coverage of the use in an agricultural activity shall increase to 95 %, starting from the reference year following the date on which that Union legislation becomes applicable.
6.   The Commission may adopt implementing acts to further specify the coverage requirements referred to in paragraphs 2 to 5 of this Article. In the event that those specifications are updated, the Commission shall take into account economic and technical trends. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 19(2) at least 12 months before the beginning of the relevant reference year.
