Article 2
Definitions
For the purposes of this Regulation:
1.
‘project of common interest’ means a project or a part of a project identified as being of common interest for the Community in the field of transport in the framework of Decision No 1692/96/EC or in the field of energy in the framework of Decision No 1364/2006/EC,
2.
‘priority project’ in the field of transport means a project of common interest located on an axis, or any other project, listed in Annex III to Decision No 1692/96/EC or in the field of energy a project of common interest considered to be a priority for the Community in the framework of Decision No 1364/2006/EC;
3.
‘project of European interest’ in the field of energy means a mature project located on a priority axis referred to in Decision No 1364/2006/EC and which is of a cross-border nature or which has a significant impact on cross-border transmission capacity;
4.
‘part of a project’ means any activity that is independent financially, technically or over time and which contributes to the completion of a project;
5.
‘cross-border section’ means the cross-border sections referred to in Article 19b of Decision No 1692/96/EC and cross-border sections which ensure, via a third country, the continuity of a priority project between two Member States;
6.
‘bottleneck’ in the field of transport means obstacles to speed and/or capacity which make it impossible to guarantee the continuity of transport flows;
7.
‘beneficiary’ means one or more Member States, international organisations or joint undertakings, within the meaning of Article 171 of the Treaty, or public or private undertakings or bodies having complete responsibility for a project and proposing to invest their own resources or funds provided by third parties with a view to carrying out a project;
8.
‘studies’ means activities needed to prepare project implementation, including preparatory, feasibility, evaluation and validation studies, and any other technical support measure, including prior action to define and develop a project fully and decide on its financing, such as reconnaissance of the sites concerned and preparation of the financial package;
9.
‘works’ means the purchase, supply and deployment of components, systems and services, the carrying out of construction and installation works relating to a project, the acceptance of installations and the launching of a project;
10.
‘project cost’ means the total cost borne by a beneficiary of studies or works directly related to and necessary for carrying out a project;
11.
‘eligible cost’ means the part of the project cost taken into consideration by the Commission for the calculation of Community financial aid;
12.
‘loan guarantee instrument’ means a guarantee issued by the EIB in favour of a stand-by liquidity facility provided to projects of common interest in the field of transport. It covers the debt service risks due to demand shortfalls and the resulting unforeseen loss of revenue during the initial operating period of the project. The loan guarantee instrument is used only for projects whose financial viability is based, in whole or in part, on revenues, tolls or other income paid by or on behalf of the users or beneficiaries;
13.
‘availability payment schemes’ means financing schemes for infrastructure projects, built and operated by a private investor who receives periodic payments after the construction phase for the infrastructure service provided. The payment level depends on the degree of attainment of the contractually-agreed performance levels. Availability payments are made throughout the duration of a contract between the authority awarding the contract and the project promoter and serve to cover the construction, financing, maintenance and operational costs.
