Article 10
Financial provisions
1.   Budgetary commitments may be divided into annual instalments. Each year the Commission shall commit the annual instalments taking into account the state of progress of the projects or project phases receiving financial aid, the estimated needs and the budget available.
The indicative timetable for the commitment of the individual annual instalments shall be communicated to the beneficiaries and the Member States concerned.
2.   Community aid may cover only project-related expenditure incurred by the beneficiaries or by third parties responsible for the implementation of a project.
Expenditure shall be eligible from the date on which an application for aid is lodged. Expenditure resulting from projects included in the multiannual programme may be eligible as from 1 January of the current year, starting from 1 January 2007.
VAT shall not be an eligible cost, except for non-refundable VAT.
3.   Payments shall be made in the form of pre-financing, where appropriate divided into several payment instalments, intermediate payments and payment of the balance.
The payment methods shall be defined in such a way as to take into account in particular the multiannual implementation of infrastructure projects.
The pre-financing, or where appropriate the first instalment thereof, shall be paid when the financial aid is granted.
Any intermediate payments shall be made on the basis of payment applications, subject to compliance with Article 13.
Payment of the balance shall be made after acceptance of the final report concerning the project submitted by the beneficiary and certified by the Member States concerned. The final report shall detail in particular all the expenditure actually incurred.
4.   In the case of availability payment schemes, the first pre-financing payment shall be made within a period of up to three years following the granting of Community financial aid upon certification by the Member States of the start of the project and upon submission of the respective public-private partnership contract. Further pre-financing payments may be made upon certification by the Member States of the progress of the project.
Payment of the balance shall be made after the start of the operational phase of the project upon verification that the infrastructure has been delivered, certification by the Member States that the expenses claimed have actually been incurred and proof of a total amount of availability payments equalling the amount of the Community financial aid.
Where no payment of the availability payment is due because of a failure to deliver the infrastructure, the Commission shall recover the pre-financing payments it has made.
