Article 13
Obligations of distributors
1.   When making a pyrotechnic article available on the market distributors shall act with due care in relation to the requirements of this Directive.
2.   Before making a pyrotechnic article available on the market distributors shall verify that the pyrotechnic article bears the CE marking, that it is accompanied by the required documents, and by instructions and safety information in a language which can be easily understood by consumers and other end-users in the Member State in which the pyrotechnic article is to be made available on the market, and that the manufacturer and the importer have complied with the requirements set out in Article 8(5) and (6) and Article 12(3) respectively.
Where a distributor considers or has reason to believe that a pyrotechnic article is not in conformity with the essential safety requirements set out in Annex I, he shall not make the pyrotechnic article available on the market until it has been brought into conformity. Furthermore, where the pyrotechnic article presents a risk, the distributor shall inform the manufacturer or the importer to that effect as well as the market surveillance authorities.
3.   Distributors shall ensure that, while a pyrotechnic article is under their responsibility, its storage or transport conditions do not jeopardise its compliance with the essential safety requirements set out in Annex I.
4.   Distributors who consider or have reason to believe that a pyrotechnic article which they have made available on the market is not in conformity with this Directive shall make sure that the corrective measures necessary to bring that pyrotechnic article into conformity, to withdraw it or recall it, if appropriate, are taken. Furthermore, where the pyrotechnic article presents a risk, distributors shall immediately inform the competent national authorities of the Member States in which they made the pyrotechnic article available on the market to that effect, giving details, in particular, of the non-compliance and of any corrective measures taken.
5.   Distributors shall, further to a reasoned request from a competent national authority, provide it with all the information and documentation in paper or electronic form necessary to demonstrate the conformity of a pyrotechnic article. They shall cooperate with that authority, at its request, on any action taken to eliminate the risks posed by pyrotechnic articles which they have made available on the market.
