Article 41
Compliant pyrotechnic articles which present a risk to health or safety
1.   Where, having carried out an evaluation under Article 39(1), a Member State finds that although a pyrotechnic article is in compliance with this Directive, it presents a risk to the health or safety of persons or to other aspects of public interest protection, it shall require the relevant economic operator to take all appropriate measures to ensure that the pyrotechnic article concerned, when placed on the market, no longer presents that risk, to withdraw the pyrotechnic article from the market or to recall it within a reasonable period, commensurate with the nature of the risk, as it may prescribe.
2.   The economic operator shall ensure that corrective action is taken in respect of all the pyrotechnic articles concerned that he has made available on the market throughout the Union.
3.   The Member State shall immediately inform the Commission and the other Member States. That information shall include all available details, in particular the data necessary for the identification of the pyrotechnic article concerned, the origin and the supply chain of the pyrotechnic article, the nature of the risk involved and the nature and duration of the national measures taken.
4.   The Commission shall without delay enter into consultation with the Member States and the relevant economic operator or operators and shall evaluate the national measures taken. On the basis of the results of that evaluation, the Commission shall decide by means of implementing acts whether the national measure is justified or not, and where necessary, propose appropriate measures.
The implementing acts referred to in the first subparagraph shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 44(3).
On duly justified imperative grounds of urgency relating to the protection of health and safety of persons, the Commission shall adopt immediately applicable implementing acts in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 44(4).
5.   The Commission shall address its decision to all Member States and shall immediately communicate it to them and the relevant economic operator or operators.
