Article 8
Obligations of the manufacturers
1.   When placing their pyrotechnic articles on the market, manufacturers shall ensure that they have been designed and manufactured in accordance with the essential safety requirements set out in Annex I.
2.   Manufacturers shall draw up the technical documentation referred to in Annex II and have the relevant conformity assessment procedure referred to in Article 17 carried out.
Where compliance of a pyrotechnic article with the applicable requirements has been demonstrated by that procedure, manufacturers shall draw up an EU declaration of conformity and affix the CE marking.
3.   Manufacturers shall keep the technical documentation and the EU declaration of conformity for 10 years after the pyrotechnic article has been placed on the market.
4.   Manufacturers shall ensure that procedures are in place for series production to remain in conformity with this Directive. Changes in pyrotechnic article design or characteristics and changes in the harmonised standards or in other technical specifications by reference to which conformity of a pyrotechnic article is declared shall be adequately taken into account.
When deemed appropriate with regard to the risks presented by a pyrotechnic article, manufacturers shall, to protect the health and safety of consumers, upon a duly justified request of the competent authorities, carry out sample testing of pyrotechnic articles made available on the market, investigate, and, if necessary, keep a register of complaints, of non-conforming pyrotechnic articles and pyrotechnic article recalls, and shall keep distributors informed of any such monitoring.
5.   Manufacturers shall ensure that pyrotechnic articles which they have placed on the market are labelled in accordance with Article 10 or Article 11.
6.   Manufacturers shall indicate on the pyrotechnic article their name, registered trade name or registered trade mark and the postal address at which they can be contacted or, where that is not possible, on its packaging or in a document accompanying the pyrotechnic article. The address shall indicate a single point at which the manufacturer can be contacted. The contact details shall be in a language easily understood by end-users and market surveillance authorities.
7.   Manufacturers shall ensure that the pyrotechnic article is accompanied by instructions and safety information in a language which can be easily understood by consumers and other end-users, as determined by the Member State concerned. Such instructions and safety information, as well as any labelling, shall be clear, understandable and intelligible.
8.   Manufacturers who consider or have reason to believe that a pyrotechnic article which they have placed on the market is not in conformity with this Directive shall immediately take the corrective measures necessary to bring that pyrotechnic article into conformity, to withdraw it or recall it, if appropriate. Furthermore, where the pyrotechnic article presents a risk, manufacturers shall immediately inform the competent national authorities of the Member States in which they made the pyrotechnic article available on the market to that effect, giving details, in particular, of the non-compliance and of any corrective measures taken.
9.   Manufacturers shall, further to a reasoned request from a competent national authority, provide it with all the information and documentation in paper or electronic form necessary to demonstrate the conformity of the pyrotechnic article with this Directive, in a language which can be easily understood by that authority. They shall cooperate with that authority, at its request, on any action taken to eliminate the risks posed by pyrotechnic articles which they have placed on the market.
