Article 12
Obligations of importers
1.   Importers shall place only compliant pyrotechnic articles on the market.
2.   Before placing a pyrotechnic article on the market importers shall ensure that the appropriate conformity assessment procedure referred to in Article 17 has been carried out by the manufacturer. They shall ensure that the manufacturer has drawn up the technical documentation, that the pyrotechnic article bears the CE marking and is accompanied by the required documents, and that the manufacturer has complied with the requirements set out in Article 8(5) and (6).
Where an importer considers or has reason to believe that a pyrotechnic article is not in conformity with the essential safety requirements set out in Annex I, he shall not place the pyrotechnic article on the market until it has been brought into conformity. Furthermore, where the pyrotechnic article presents a risk, the importer shall inform the manufacturer and the market surveillance authorities to that effect.
3.   Importers shall indicate on the pyrotechnic article their name, registered trade name or registered trade mark and the postal address at which they can be contacted or, where that is not possible, on its packaging or in a document accompanying the pyrotechnic article. The contact details shall be in a language easily understood by end-users and market surveillance authorities.
4.   Importers shall ensure that the pyrotechnic article is accompanied by instructions and safety information in a language which can be easily understood by consumers and other end-users, as determined by the Member State concerned.
5.   Importers shall ensure that, while a pyrotechnic article is under their responsibility, its storage or transport conditions do not jeopardise its compliance with the essential safety requirements set out in Annex I.
6.   When deemed appropriate with regard to the risks presented by a pyrotechnic article, importers shall, to protect the health and safety of consumers, upon a duly justified request of the competent authorities, carry out sample testing of pyrotechnic articles made available on the market, investigate, and, if necessary, keep a register of complaints, of non-conforming pyrotechnic articles and pyrotechnic articles recalls, and shall keep distributors informed of any such monitoring.
7.   Importers who consider or have reason to believe that a pyrotechnic article which they have placed on the market is not in conformity with this Directive shall immediately take the corrective measures necessary to bring that pyrotechnic article into conformity, to withdraw it or recall it, if appropriate. Furthermore, where the pyrotechnic article presents a risk, importers shall immediately inform the competent national authorities of the Member States in which they made the pyrotechnic article available on the market to that effect, giving details, in particular, of the non-compliance and of any corrective measures taken.
8.   Importers shall, for 10 years after the pyrotechnic article has been placed on the market, keep a copy of the EU declaration of conformity at the disposal of the market surveillance authorities and ensure that the technical documentation can be made available to those authorities, upon request.
9.   Importers shall, further to a reasoned request from a competent national authority, provide it with all the information and documentation in paper or electronic form necessary to demonstrate the conformity of a pyrotechnic article in a language which can be easily understood by that authority. They shall cooperate with that authority, at its request, on any action taken to eliminate the risks posed by pyrotechnic articles which they have placed on the market.
