Article 10
Labelling of pyrotechnic articles other than pyrotechnic articles for vehicles
1.   Manufacturers shall ensure that pyrotechnic articles other than pyrotechnic articles for vehicles are labelled visibly, legibly and indelibly in the official language(s) of the Member State in which the pyrotechnic article is made available to the consumer. Such labelling shall be clear, understandable and intelligible.
2.   The labelling of pyrotechnic articles shall include as a minimum the information about the manufacturer set out in Article 8(6) and, where the manufacturer is not established in the Union, the information about the manufacturer and the importer set out in Article 8(6) and Article 12(3) respectively, the name and type of the pyrotechnic article, its registration number and its product, batch or serial number, the minimum age limits set out in Article 7(1) and (2), the relevant category and instructions for use, the year of production for category F3 and F4 fireworks and, where appropriate, a minimum safety distance. The labelling shall include the net explosive content (NEC).
3.   Fireworks shall also display the following minimum information:
(a)
category F1: where appropriate: ‘for outdoor use only’ and a minimum safety distance;
(b)
category F2: ‘for outdoor use only’ and, where appropriate, minimum safety distance(s);
(c)
category F3: ‘for outdoor use only’ and minimum safety distance(s);
(d)
category F4: ‘for use only by persons with specialist knowledge’ and minimum safety distance(s).
4.   Theatrical pyrotechnic articles shall also display the following minimum information:
(a)
category T1: where appropriate: ‘for outdoor use only’ and minimum safety distance(s);
(b)
category T2: ‘for use only by persons with specialist knowledge’ and minimum safety distance(s).
5.   If the pyrotechnic article does not provide sufficient space for the labelling requirements referred to in paragraphs 2, 3 and 4, the information shall be provided on the smallest piece of packaging.
