Article 25
Cooperation and exchange of information
1.   Where required to ensure compliance with this Regulation, the competent authorities of each Member State, including customs authorities, market surveillance authorities, environmental authorities and any other competent authority with inspection functions, shall cooperate with each other, with the competent authorities of other Member States, with the Commission and, if necessary, with administrative authorities of third countries.
Where cooperation with customs authorities is needed to ensure a proper implementation of the Customs Risk Management System, competent authorities of Member States shall provide all necessary information to customs authorities in accordance with Article 47(2) of Regulation (EU) No 952/2013.
2.   Where the customs authorities, the market surveillance authorities or any other competent authority of a Member State detect an infringement of this Regulation, that competent authority shall notify the environmental authority or, if not relevant, any other authority responsible for the enforcement of penalties in accordance with Article 27.
3.   Member States shall ensure that their competent authorities are able to efficiently have access to and exchange between them any information necessary for the enforcement of this Regulation. Such information shall include customs related data, information on ownership and financial status, any violation of environmental law, as well as data recorded in the licensing system.
The information referred to in the first subparagraph shall also be made available to competent authorities of other Member States and to the Commission when needed to ensure the enforcement of this Regulation.
4.   Competent authorities shall alert competent authorities of other Member States when they detect an infringement of this Regulation that may affect more than one Member State. Competent authorities shall, in particular, inform competent authorities of other Member States when they detect a relevant product on the market that does not comply with this Regulation, to enable that it is seized, confiscated, withdrawn or recalled from the market for disposal.
The Customs Risk Management System shall be used for the exchange of customs risk-related information.
Customs authorities shall also exchange any relevant information related to infringements of this Regulation in accordance with Council Regulation (EC) No 515/97 (23) and shall request assistance from the other Member States and the Commission where necessary.
