Article 20
Recovery and destruction of used ozone-depleting substances
1.   Ozone-depleting substances which are contained in refrigeration and air-conditioning equipment and heat pumps, equipment containing solvents or fire protection systems and fire extinguishers shall, during the maintenance or servicing of equipment or before the dismantling or disposal of equipment, be recovered for destruction, recycling or reclamation, unless such recovery is regulated under other Union legal acts.
2.   From 1 January 2025, building owners and contractors shall ensure that, during renovation, refurbishing or demolition activities implying the removal of foam panels that contain foams with ozone-depleting substances listed in Annex I, emissions are avoided to the extent possible by handling the foams or the substances contained therein in a way that ensures the destruction of those substances. In the case of recovery of those substances, the recovery shall be carried out only by appropriately qualified natural persons.
3.   From 1 January 2025, building owners and contractors shall ensure that, during renovation, refurbishing or demolition activities implying the removal of foams in laminated boards installed in cavities or built-up structures that contain ozone-depleting substances listed in Annex I, emissions are avoided to the extent possible by handling the foams or the substances contained therein in a way that ensures the destruction of those substances. In the case of recovery of those substances, the recovery shall be carried out only by appropriately qualified natural persons.
Where removal of the foams referred to in the first subparagraph is not technically feasible, the building owner or contractor shall draw up documentation providing evidence on the infeasibility of the removal in the specific case. Such documentation shall be kept for 5 years and shall be made available, upon request, to the competent authority of the Member State concerned or to the Commission.
4.   Halons contained in fire protection systems and fire extinguishers shall, during the maintenance or servicing of equipment or before the dismantling or disposal of equipment, be recovered for recycling or reclamation.
The destruction of halons shall be prohibited unless there is documented evidence that the purity of the recovered or recycled substance does not technically allow its reclamation and subsequent re-use. Undertakings destroying halons in such cases shall keep this documentation for at least 5 years. Such documentation shall be made available, upon request, to the competent authority of the Member State concerned or to the Commission.
5.   Ozone-depleting substances contained in products and equipment other than those referred to in paragraphs 1 to 4 shall, if technically and economically feasible, be recovered for destruction, recycling or reclamation, or shall be destroyed without prior recovery, unless such recovery is regulated under other Union legal acts.
6.   Ozone-depleting substances listed in Annex I, and products and equipment containing such substances, shall be destroyed only by destruction technology that has been approved by the Parties to the Protocol.
Other ozone-depleting substances for which the destruction technology has not been approved shall be destroyed only by destruction technology that complies with Union and national law on waste and where additional requirements under such law are met.
7.   The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 29 to supplement this Regulation by establishing a list of products and equipment for which the recovery of ozone-depleting substances or destruction of products and equipment without prior recovery of ozone-depleting substances shall be considered technically and economically feasible, specifying, if appropriate, the technology to be applied.
8.   Member States shall promote the recovery, recycling, reclamation and destruction of ozone-depleting substances listed in Annex I and shall establish the minimum qualification requirements for the personnel involved.
