Article 9
Critical uses of halons
1.   By way of derogation from Article 4(1), halons may be placed on the market and used for critical uses in accordance with Annex V. Halons may only be placed on the market and subsequently supplied or made available to another person within the Union for payment or free of charge by undertakings authorised by the competent authority of the Member State concerned to store halons for critical uses.
2.   Fire protection systems and fire extinguishers containing halons applied for critical uses referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article or whose functioning relies upon those halons shall be decommissioned by the end dates set out in Annex V. The halons contained in fire protection systems and fire extinguishers shall be recovered in accordance with Article 20(5).
3.   The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 29 to amend Annex V where technically and economically feasible alternatives or technology is not available for the critical uses listed in that Annex within the timeframes set out therein or not acceptable due to their effect on the environment or health, or where it is necessary to ensure compliance with the international commitments of the Union concerning critical uses of halons, established in particular under the Protocol, by the International Civil Aviation Organization or under the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships.
4.   The Commission may, by means of implementing acts, and following a substantiated request of the competent authority of a Member State, grant time-limited derogations from the end dates or cut-off dates set out in Annex V for a specific case where it is demonstrated in the derogation request that no technically and economically feasible alternative is available for that particular application. The Commission shall include reporting requirements in those implementing acts and shall require the submission of supporting evidence necessary for monitoring the use of the derogation, including evidence on quantities of halons recovered for recycling or reclamation, results of leak checks and quantities of unused halons in stocks. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 28(2).
