Article 27
Common purchasing
1.   Where the crisis stage is activated pursuant to Article 23, the Commission may, upon the request of two or more Member States, act as a central purchasing body on behalf of all Member States willing to participate (participating Member State) for their public procurement of crisis-relevant products for critical sectors (common purchasing). Participation in the common purchasing shall be without prejudice to other procurement procedures. The request for common purchasing shall set out reasons on which it is based and shall be used exclusively to address supply-chain disruptions of semiconductors leading to the crisis.
2.   The Commission shall assess the utility, necessity and proportionality of the request, taking into account the views of the European Semiconductor Board. Where the Commission intends not to follow the request, it shall inform the Member States concerned and the European Semiconductor Board and give reasons for its refusal.
3.   The Commission shall draw up a proposal for an agreement to be signed by the participating Member States. Such an agreement shall organise in detail the common purchasing referred to in paragraph 1, including reasons for the use of the common purchasing mechanism and liabilities to be assumed, and establish the mandate for the Commission to act on behalf of the participating Member States.
4.   Procurement under this Regulation shall be carried out by the Commission in accordance with the rules set out in Regulation (EU, Euratom) 2018/1046 of the European Parliament and of the Council (33) (the Financial Regulation) for its own procurement. The Commission may have the ability and responsibility, on behalf of all participating Member States, to enter into contracts with economic operators, including individual producers of crisis-relevant products, concerning the purchase of such products or concerning the financing of the production or the development of such products in exchange for a priority right to the result.
5.   Where the procurement of crisis-relevant products includes financing from the Union budget, specific conditions may be set out in specific agreements with economic operators.
6.   The Commission shall carry out the procurement procedures and conclude the contracts with economic operators on behalf of the participating Member States. The Commission shall invite the participating Member States to appoint representatives to take part in the preparation of the procurement procedures. The deployment, use or resale of the purchased products shall remain the responsibility of the participating Member States, in accordance with the agreement referred to in paragraph 3.
7.   The deployment of common purchasing pursuant to this Article shall be without prejudice to other instruments provided for in the Financial Regulation.
