Article 33
Penalties
1.   The Commission may, where it deems it to be necessary and proportionate, adopt a decision to:
(a)
impose fines, where an undertaking, intentionally or through gross negligence, supplies incorrect, incomplete or misleading information in response to a request made pursuant to Article 25, or does not supply the information within the prescribed time limit;
(b)
impose fines, where an undertaking, intentionally or through gross negligence, does not comply with the obligation to inform the Commission of a third-country obligation pursuant to Article 25(7) and Article 26(3);
(c)
impose periodic penalty payments, where an undertaking, intentionally or through gross negligence, does not comply with an obligation to prioritise the production of crisis-relevant products pursuant to Article 26.
2.   Before taking a decision pursuant to paragraph 1 of this Article, the Commission shall provide an opportunity for undertakings to be heard in accordance with Article 36. It shall take into account any duly reasoned justification presented by such undertakings for the purpose of determining whether fines or periodic penalty payments are deemed necessary and proportionate.
3.   Fines imposed in the cases referred to in paragraph 1, point (a), shall not exceed EUR 300 000.
Fines imposed in the cases referred to in paragraph 1, point (b), shall not exceed EUR 150 000.
Where the undertaking concerned is an SME, the fines imposed shall not exceed EUR 50 000.
4.   Periodic penalty payments imposed in the case referred to in paragraph 1, point (c), shall not exceed 1,5 % of the current daily turnover for each working day of non-compliance with the obligation pursuant to Article 26 calculated from the date established in the decision in which the priority-rated order was issued.
Where the undertaking concerned is an SME, the periodic penalty payments imposed shall not exceed 0,5 % of the current daily turnover.
5.   In fixing the amount of the fine or periodic penalty payment, the Commission shall take into consideration the nature, gravity and duration of the infringement, including in cases of non-compliance with the obligation to accept and prioritise a priority-rated order set out in Article 26, and whether the undertaking has partially complied with the priority-rated order, taking due account of the principles of proportionality and appropriateness.
6.   Where the undertaking has fulfilled the requirements which the periodic penalty payment was intended to enforce, the Commission may fix the definitive amount of the periodic penalty payment at a figure lower than that which would arise under the original decision.
7.   The Court of Justice shall have unlimited jurisdiction to review decisions whereby the Commission has fixed a fine or a periodic penalty payment. It may cancel, reduce or increase the fine or periodic penalty payment imposed.
