Article 31
Designation of national competent authorities and single points of contact
1.   Each Member State shall designate one or more national competent authorities for the purpose of ensuring the application and implementation of this Regulation at national level.
2.   Where a Member State designates more than one national competent authority, it shall clearly set out the respective responsibilities of the authorities concerned and shall ensure that they cooperate effectively and efficiently to fulfil their tasks under this Regulation, including with regard to the designation and activities of the national single point of contact referred to in paragraph 3.
3.   Each Member State shall designate one national single point of contact to exercise a liaison function to ensure cross-border cooperation with national competent authorities of other Member States, with the Commission and with the European Semiconductor Board (single point of contact). Where a Member State designates only one competent authority, that competent authority shall also be the single point of contact.
4.   Each Member State shall notify the Commission of the designation of the national competent authority or more than one national competent authority, and the national single point of contact, including their precise tasks and responsibilities under this Regulation, their contact information and any subsequent changes thereto.
5.   Member States shall ensure that national competent authorities, including the single point of contact designated, exercise their powers impartially, transparently and in a timely manner and that they are provided with the powers and the adequate technical, financial and human resources to fulfil their tasks under this Regulation.
6.   Member States shall ensure that national competent authorities, whenever appropriate and in accordance with Union and national law, consult and cooperate with other relevant national authorities, as well as with relevant interested parties.
The Commission shall facilitate the exchange of experience between national competent authorities.
