Article 25
Information gathering
1.   Where the crisis stage is activated pursuant to Article 23, the Commission may request undertakings operating along the semiconductor supply chain to provide information about their production capabilities, production capacities and current primary disruptions. The requested information shall be limited to what is necessary to assess the nature of the semiconductor crisis or to identify and assess potential mitigation or emergency measures at Union or national level. The information requests shall not entail the supply of information the disclosure of which would be contrary to the Member States’ national security interests.
2.   Before launching a request for information, the Commission may carry out a voluntary consultation of a representative number of relevant undertakings with a view to identifying the appropriate and proportionate content of such a request. The Commission shall develop the request for information in cooperation with the European Semiconductor Board.
3.   The Commission shall use the secure means and handle any acquired information in accordance with Article 32 to launch the request for information. For this purpose, national competent authorities shall transmit to the Commission the list of contacts established under Article 20(5).
The Commission shall without delay forward a copy of the request for information to the national competent authority of the Member State in whose territory the production site of the addressed undertaking is situated. If the national competent authority so requires, the Commission shall transmit the information acquired from the relevant undertaking in accordance with Union law.
4.   The request for information shall state its legal basis, be limited to the minimum necessary and be proportionate in terms of the granularity and volume of the data and frequency of access to the data requested, have regard for the legitimate aims of the undertaking and the cost and effort required to make the data available, and set out the time limit within which the information is to be provided. It shall also state the penalties provided for in Article 33.
5.   The owners of the undertakings or their representatives and, in the case of legal persons or associations having no legal personality, the persons authorised to represent them by law or by their constitution shall supply the information requested on behalf of the undertaking or the association of undertakings concerned.
6.   If an undertaking supplies incorrect, incomplete or misleading information in response to a request made pursuant to this Article, or does not supply the information within the prescribed time limit, it shall be subject to fines set in accordance with Article 33, except where the undertaking has sufficient reasons for not supplying the requested information.
7.   If an undertaking established in the Union is subject to a request for information from a third country, related to its semiconductor activities, it shall inform the Commission, in due time, in such a manner as to enable the Commission to request similar information from the undertaking. The Commission shall inform the European Semiconductor Board of the existence of such request from a third country.
