Article 11
Energy system wide cost-benefit analysis
1.   By 16 November 2013, the European Network of Transmission System Operators (ENTSO) for Electricity and the ENTSO for Gas shall publish and submit to Member States, the Commission and the Agency their respective methodologies, including on network and market modelling, for a harmonised energy system-wide cost-benefit analysis at Union level for projects of common interest falling under the categories set out in Annex II.1(a) to (d) and Annex II.2. Those methodologies shall be applied for the preparation of each subsequent 10-year network development plan developed by the ENTSO for Electricity or the ENTSO for Gas pursuant to Article 8 of Regulation (EC) No 714/2009 and Article 8 of Regulation (EC) No 715/2009. The methodologies shall be drawn up in line with the principles laid down in Annex V and be consistent with the rules and indicators set out in Annex IV.
Prior to submitting their respective methodologies, the ENTSO for Electricity and the ENTSO for Gas shall conduct an extensive consultation process involving at least the organisations representing all relevant stakeholders — and, if deemed appropriate, the stakeholders themselves — national regulatory authorities and other national authorities.
2.   Within three months of the day of receipt of the methodologies, the Agency shall provide an opinion to Member States and the Commission on the methodologies and publish it.
3.   Within three months of the receipt of the opinion of the Agency, the Commission shall, and Member States may, deliver an opinion on the methodologies. The opinions shall be submitted to the ENTSO for Electricity or the ENTSO for Gas.
4.   Within three months of the day of receipt of the last opinion received under paragraph 3, the ENTSO for Electricity and the ENTSO for Gas shall adapt their methodologies taking due account of the opinions received from Member States, the Commission’s opinion and the Agency’s opinion, and submit them to the Commission for approval.
5.   Within two weeks of the approval by the Commission, the ENTSO for Electricity and the ENTSO for Gas shall publish their respective methodologies on their websites. They shall transmit the corresponding input data sets as defined in Annex V.1 and other relevant network, load flow and market data in a sufficiently accurate form according to national law and relevant confidentiality agreements to the Commission and the Agency, upon request. The data shall be valid at the date of the request. The Commission and the Agency shall ensure the confidential treatment of the data received, by themselves and by any party carrying out analytical work for them on the basis of those data.
6.   The methodologies shall be updated and improved regularly in accordance with paragraphs 1 to 5. The Agency, on its own initiative or upon a duly reasoned request by national regulatory authorities or stakeholders, and after formally consulting the organisations representing all relevant stakeholders and the Commission, may request such updates and improvements with due justification and timescales. The Agency shall publish the requests by national regulatory authorities or stakeholders and all relevant non-commercially sensitive documents leading to a request from the Agency for an update or improvement.
7.   By 16 May 2015, national regulatory authorities cooperating in the framework of the Agency shall establish and make publicly available a set of indicators and corresponding reference values for the comparison of unit investment costs for comparable projects of the infrastructure categories included in Annex II.1 and 2. Those reference values may be used by the ENTSO for Electricity and the ENTSO for Gas for the cost-benefit analyses carried out for subsequent 10-year network development plans.
8.   By 31 December 2016, the ENTSO for Electricity and the ENTSO for Gas shall jointly submit to the Commission and the Agency a consistent and interlinked electricity and gas market and network model including both electricity and gas transmission infrastructure as well as storage and LNG facilities, covering the energy infrastructure priority corridors and areas and drawn up in line with the principles laid down in Annex V. After approval of this model by the Commission according to the procedure set out in paragraphs 2 to 4, it shall be included in the methodologies.
