Article 8
Organisation of the permit granting process
1.   By 16 November 2013, each Member State shall designate one national competent authority which shall be responsible for facilitating and coordinating the permit granting process for projects of common interest.
2.   The responsibility of the competent authority referred to in paragraph 1 and/or the tasks related to it may be delegated to, or carried out by, another authority, per project of common interest or per particular category of projects of common interest, provided that:
(a)
the competent authority notifies the Commission of that delegation and the information therein is published by either the competent authority or the project promoter on the website referred to in Article 9(7);
(b)
only one authority is responsible per project of common interest, is the sole point of contact for the project promoter in the process leading to the comprehensive decision for a given project of common interest, and coordinates the submission of all relevant documents and information.
The competent authority may retain the responsibility to establish time limits, without prejudice to the time limits set in accordance with Article 10.
3.   Without prejudice to relevant requirements under international and Union law, the competent authority shall take actions to facilitate the issuing of the comprehensive decision. The comprehensive decision shall be issued within the time limit referred to in Article 10(1) and (2) and according to one of the following schemes:
(a)   integrated scheme: the comprehensive decision shall be issued by the competent authority and shall be the sole legally binding decision resulting from the statutory permit granting procedure. Where other authorities are concerned by the project, they may, in accordance with national law, give their opinion as input to the procedure, which shall be taken into account by the competent authority;
(b)   coordinated scheme: the comprehensive decision comprises multiple individual legally binding decisions issued by several authorities concerned, which shall be coordinated by the competent authority. The competent authority may establish a working group where all concerned authorities are represented in order to draw up a permit granting schedule in accordance with Article 10(4)(b), and to monitor and coordinate its implementation. The competent authority shall, in consultation with the other authorities concerned, where applicable in accordance with national law, and without prejudice to time limits set in accordance with Article 10, establish on a case-by-case basis a reasonable time limit within which the individual decisions shall be issued. The competent authority may take an individual decision on behalf of another national authority concerned, if the decision by that authority is not delivered within the time limit and if the delay cannot be adequately justified; or, where provided under national law, and to the extent that this is compatible with Union law, the competent authority may consider that another national authority concerned has either given its approval or refusal for the project if the decision by that authority is not delivered within the time limit. Where provided under national law, the competent authority may disregard an individual decision of another national authority concerned if it considers that the decision is not sufficiently substantiated with regard to the underlying evidence presented by the national authority concerned; when doing so, the competent authority shall ensure that the relevant requirements under international and Union law are respected and shall duly justify its decision;
(c)   collaborative scheme: the comprehensive decision shall be coordinated by the competent authority. The competent authority shall, in consultation with the other authorities concerned, where applicable in accordance with national law, and without prejudice to time limits set in accordance with Article 10, establish on a case-by-case basis a reasonable time limit within which the individual decisions shall be issued. It shall monitor compliance with the time limits by the authorities concerned.
If an individual decision by an authority concerned is not expected to be delivered within the time limit, that authority shall inform the competent authority without delay and include a justification for the delay. Subsequently, the competent authority shall reset the time limit within which that individual decision shall be issued, whilst still complying with the overall time limits set in accordance with Article 10.
Acknowledging the national specificities in planning and permit granting processes, Member States may choose among the three schemes referred to in points (a), (b) and (c) of the first subparagraph to facilitate and coordinate their procedures and shall opt to implement the most effective scheme. Where a Member State chooses the collaborative scheme, it shall inform the Commission of its reasons therefor. The Commission shall undertake an evaluation of the effectiveness of the schemes in the report referred to in Article 17.
4.   Member States may apply different schemes as set out in paragraph 3 to onshore and offshore projects of common interest.
5.   If a project of common interest requires decisions to be taken in two or more Member States, the respective competent authorities shall take all necessary steps for efficient and effective cooperation and coordination among themselves, including as regards the provisions referred to in Article 10(4). Member States shall endeavour to provide for joint procedures, particularly with regard to the assessment of environmental impacts.
