Article 9
Transparency and public participation
1.   By 16 May 2014, the Member State or competent authority shall, where applicable in collaboration with other authorities concerned, publish a manual of procedures for the permit granting process applicable to projects of common interest. The manual shall be updated as necessary and made available to the public. The manual shall at least include the information specified in Annex VI.1. The manual shall not be legally binding, but it may refer to or quote relevant legal provisions.
2.   Without prejudice to any requirements under the Aarhus and Espoo Conventions and relevant Union law, all parties involved in the permit granting process shall follow the principles for public participation set out in of Annex VI.3.
3.   The project promoter shall, within an indicative period of three months of the start of the permit granting process pursuant to Article 10(1)(a), draw up and submit a concept for public participation to the competent authority, following the process outlined in the manual referred to in paragraph 1 and in line with the guidelines set out in Annex VI. The competent authority shall request modifications or approve the concept for public participation within three months; in so doing, the competent authority shall take into consideration any form of public participation and consultation that took place before the start of the permit granting process, to the extent that such public participation and consultation has fulfilled the requirements of this Article.
Where the project promoter intends to make significant changes to an approved concept, it shall inform the competent authority thereof. In that case the competent authority may request modifications.
4.   At least one public consultation shall be carried out by the project promoter, or, where required by national law, by the competent authority, before submission of the final and complete application file to the competent authority pursuant to Article 10(1)(a). This shall be without prejudice to any public consultation to be carried out after submission of the request for development consent according to Article 6(2) of Directive 2011/92/EU. The public consultation shall inform stakeholders referred to in Annex VI.3(a) about the project at an early stage and shall help to identify the most suitable location or trajectory and the relevant issues to be addressed in the application file. The minimum requirements applicable to this public consultation are specified in Annex VI.5.
The project promoter shall prepare a report summarising the results of activities related to the participation of the public prior to the submission of the application file, including those activities that took place before the start of the permit granting process. The project promoter shall submit that report together with the application file to the competent authority. Due account shall be taken of these results in the comprehensive decision.
5.   For projects crossing the border of two or more Member States, the public consultations pursuant to paragraph 4 in each of the Member States concerned shall take place within a period of no more than two months from the date on which the first public consultation started.
6.   For projects likely to have significant adverse cross-border impacts in one or more neighbouring Member States, where Article 7 of Directive 2011/92/EU and the Espoo Convention are applicable, the relevant information shall be made available to the competent authority of the neighbouring Member States. The competent authority of the neighbouring Member States shall indicate, in the notification process where appropriate, whether it, or any other authority concerned, wishes to participate in the relevant public consultation procedures.
7.   The project promoter, or, where national law so provides, the competent authority, shall establish and regularly update a website with relevant information about the project of common interest, which shall be linked to the Commission website and which shall meet the requirements specified in Annex VI.6. Commercially sensitive information shall be kept confidential.
Project promoters shall also publish relevant information by other appropriate information means to which the public has open access.
