Article 5
Implementation and monitoring
1.   Project promoters shall draw up an implementation plan for projects of common interest, including a timetable for each of the following:
(a)
feasibility and design studies;
(b)
approval by the national regulatory authority or by any other authority concerned;
(c)
construction and commissioning;
(d)
the permit granting schedule referred to in Article 10(4)(b).
2.   TSOs, distribution system operators and other operators shall co-operate with each other in order to facilitate the development of projects of common interest in their area.
3.   The Agency and the Groups concerned shall monitor the progress achieved in implementing the projects of common interest and, if necessary, make recommendations to facilitate the implementation of projects of common interest. The Groups may request that additional information be provided in accordance with paragraphs 4, 5 and 6, convene meetings with the relevant parties and invite the Commission to verify the information provided on site.
4.   By 31 March of each year following the year of inclusion of a project of common interest on the Union list pursuant to Article 3, project promoters shall submit an annual report, for each project falling under the categories set out in Annex II.1 and 2, to the competent authority referred to in Article 8 and either to the Agency or, for projects falling under the categories set out in Annex II.3 and 4, to the respective Group. That report shall give details of:
(a)
the progress achieved in the development, construction and commissioning of the project, in particular with regard to permit granting and consultation procedures;
(b)
where relevant, delays compared to the implementation plan, the reasons for such delays and other difficulties encountered;
(c)
where relevant, a revised plan aiming at overcoming the delays.
5.   Within three months of the receipt of the annual reports referred to in paragraph 4 of this Article, the Agency shall submit to the Groups a consolidated report for the projects of common interest falling under the categories set out in Annex II.1 and 2, evaluating the progress achieved and make, where appropriate, recommendations on how to overcome the delays and difficulties encountered. That consolidated report shall also evaluate, in accordance with Article 6(8) and (9) of Regulation (EC) No 713/2009, the consistent implementation of the Union-wide network development plans with regard to the energy infrastructure priority corridors and areas.
6.   Each year, the competent authorities referred to in Article 8 shall report to the respective Group on the progress and, where relevant, on delays in the implementation of projects of common interest located on their respective territory with regard to the permit granting processes, and on the reasons for such delays.
7.   If the commissioning of a project of common interest is delayed compared to the implementation plan, other than for overriding reasons beyond the control of the project promoter:
(a)
in so far as measures referred to in Article 22(7)(a), (b) or (c) of Directives 2009/72/EC and 2009/73/EC are applicable according to respective national laws, national regulatory authorities shall ensure that the investment is carried out;
(b)
if the measures of national regulatory authorities according to point (a) are not applicable, the project promoter shall choose a third party to finance or construct all or part of the project. The project promoter shall do so before the delay compared to the date of commissioning in the implementation plan exceeds two years;
(c)
if a third party is not chosen according to point (b), the Member State or, when the Member State has so provided, the national regulatory authority may, within two months of the expiry of the period referred to in point (b), designate a third party to finance or construct the project which the project promoter shall accept;
(d)
if the delay compared to the date of commissioning in the implementation plan exceeds two years and two months, the Commission, subject to the agreement and with the full cooperation of the Member States concerned, may launch a call for proposals open to any third party capable of becoming a project promoter to build the project according to an agreed timeline;
(e)
when points (c) or (d) are applied, the system operator in whose area the investment is located shall provide the implementing operators or investors or third party with all the information needed to realise the investment, shall connect new assets to the transmission network and shall generally make its best efforts to facilitate the implementation of the investment and the secure, reliable and efficient operation and maintenance of the project of common interest.
8.   A project of common interest may be removed from the Union list according to the procedure set out in Article 3(4) if its inclusion in that list was based on incorrect information which was a determining factor for that inclusion, or the project does not comply with Union law.
9.   Projects which are no longer on the Union list shall lose all rights and obligations linked to the status of project of common interest arising from this Regulation.
However, a project which is no longer on the Union list but for which an application file has been accepted for examination by the competent authority shall maintain the rights and obligations arising from Chapter III, except where the project is no longer on the list for the reasons set out in paragraph 8.
10.   This Article shall be without prejudice to any Union financial assistance granted to any project of common interest prior to its removal from the Union list.
