Whereas:
(1)
On 26 March 2010, the European Council agreed to the Commission’s proposal to launch a new strategy ‘Europe 2020’. One of the priorities of the Europe 2020 strategy is sustainable growth to be achieved by promoting a more resource-efficient, more sustainable and more competitive economy. That strategy put energy infrastructures at the forefront as part of the flagship initiative ‘Resource efficient Europe’, by underlining the need to urgently upgrade Europe’s networks, interconnecting them at the continental level, in particular to integrate renewable energy sources.
(2)
The target agreed in the conclusions of the March 2002 Barcelona European Council for Member States to have a level of electricity interconnections equivalent to at least to 10 % of their installed production capacity has not yet been achieved.
(3)
The communication from the Commission entitled ‘Energy infrastructure priorities for 2020 and beyond — A Blueprint for an integrated European energy network’, followed by the Council conclusions of 28 February 2011 and the European Parliament resolution (4), called for a new energy infrastructure policy to optimise network development at European level for the period up to 2020 and beyond, in order to allow the Union to meet its core energy policy objectives of competitiveness, sustainability and security of supply.
(4)
The European Council of 4 February 2011 underlined the need to modernise and expand Europe’s energy infrastructure and to interconnect networks across borders, in order to make solidarity between Member States operational, to provide for alternative supply or transit routes and sources of energy and to develop renewable energy sources in competition with traditional sources. It insisted that no Member State should remain isolated from the European gas and electricity networks after 2015 or see its energy security jeopardised by lack of the appropriate connections.
(5)
Decision No 1364/2006/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (5) lays down guidelines for trans-European energy networks (TEN-E). Those guidelines have as objectives to support the completion of the Union internal energy market while encouraging the rational production, transportation, distribution and use of energy resources, to reduce the isolation of less-favoured and island regions, to secure and diversify the Union’s energy supplies, sources and routes, including through cooperation with third countries, and to contribute to sustainable development and protection of the environment.
(6)
Evaluation of the current TEN-E framework has clearly shown that this framework, while making a positive contribution to selected projects by giving them political visibility, lacks vision, focus, and flexibility to fill identified infrastructure gaps. The Union should therefore increase its efforts to meet future challenges in this field, and due attention should be paid to identifying potential future gaps in energy demand and supply.
(7)
Accelerating the refurbishment of existing energy infrastructure and the deployment of new energy infrastructure is vital to achieve the Union’s energy and climate policy objectives, consisting of completing the internal market in energy, guaranteeing security of supply, in particular for gas and oil, reducing greenhouse gas emissions by 20 % (30 % if the conditions are right), increasing the share of renewable energy in final energy consumption to 20 % (6) and achieving a 20 % increase in energy efficiency by 2020 whereby energy efficiency gains may contribute to reducing the need for construction of new infrastructures. At the same time, the Union has to prepare its infrastructure for further decarbonisation of its energy system in the longer term towards 2050. This Regulation should therefore also be able to accommodate possible future Union energy and climate policy objectives.
(8)
Despite the fact that Directive 2009/72/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 July 2009 concerning common rules for the internal market in electricity (7) and Directive 2009/73/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 July 2009 concerning common rules for the internal market in natural gas (8) provide for an internal market in energy, the market remains fragmented due to insufficient interconnections between national energy networks and to the suboptimal utilisation of existing energy infrastructure. However, Union-wide integrated networks and deployment of smart grids are vital for ensuring a competitive and properly functioning integrated market, for achieving an optimal utilisation of energy infrastructure, for increased energy efficiency and integration of distributed renewable energy sources and for promoting growth, employment and sustainable development.
(9)
The Union’s energy infrastructure should be upgraded in order to prevent technical failure and to increase its resilience against such failure, natural or man-made disasters, adverse effects of climate change and threats to its security, in particular as regards European critical infrastructures as set out in Council Directive 2008/114/EC of 8 December 2008 on the identification and designation of European critical infrastructures and the assessment of the need to improve their protection (9).
(10)
Transporting oil through land pipelines rather than over water can make an important contribution to lowering the environmental risk associated with the transportation of oil.
(11)
The importance of smart grids in achieving the Union’s energy policy objectives has been acknowledged in the communication from the Commission of 12 April 2011 entitled ‘Smart grids: from innovation to deployment’.
(12)
Energy storage facilities and reception, storage and regasification or decompression facilities for liquefied natural gas (LNG) and compressed natural gas (CNG) have an increasingly important role to play in the European energy infrastructure. The expansion of such energy infrastructure facilities forms an important component of a well-functioning network infrastructure.
(13)
The communication from the Commission of 7 September 2011 entitled ‘The EU Energy Policy: Engaging with Partners beyond Our Borders’ underlined the need for the Union to include the promotion of energy infrastructure development in its external relations with a view to supporting socio-economic development beyond the Union borders. The Union should facilitate infrastructure projects linking the Union’s energy networks with third-country networks, in particular with neighbouring countries and with countries with which the Union has established specific energy cooperation.
(14)
To ensure voltage and frequency stability, particular attention should be focused on the stability of the European electricity network under the changing conditions caused by the growing inflow of energy from renewable resources that are variable in nature.
(15)
The investment needs up to 2020 in electricity and gas transmission infrastructures of European relevance have been estimated at about EUR 200 billion. The significant increase in investment volumes compared to past trends and the urgency of implementing the energy infrastructure priorities requires a new approach in the way energy infrastructures, and in particular those of a cross-border nature, are regulated and financed.
(16)
The Commission Staff Working Paper for the Council of 10 June 2011 entitled ‘Energy infrastructure investment needs and financing requirements’ stressed that approximately half of the total investments needed for the decade up to 2020 are at risk of not being delivered at all or not in time due to obstacles related to the granting of permits, regulatory issues and financing.
(17)
This Regulation lays down rules for the timely development and interoperability of trans-European energy networks in order to achieve the energy policy objectives of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU) to ensure the functioning of the internal energy market and security of supply in the Union, to promote energy efficiency and energy saving and the development of new and renewable forms of energy, and to promote the interconnection of energy networks. By pursuing these objectives, this Regulation contributes to smart, sustainable and inclusive growth and brings benefits to the entire Union in terms of competitiveness and economic, social and territorial cohesion.
(18)
It is essential for the development of trans-European networks and their effective interoperability to ensure operational coordination between electricity transmission system operators (TSOs). In order to ensure uniform conditions for the implementation of the relevant provisions of Regulation (EC) No 714/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 July 2009 on conditions for access to the network for cross-border exchanges in electricity (10) in this respect, implementing powers should be conferred on the Commission. Those powers should be exercised in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 February 2011 laying down the rules and general principles concerning mechanisms for control by Member States of the Commission’s exercise of implementing powers (11). The examination procedure should be used for the adoption of the guidelines on the implementation of operational coordination between electricity TSOs at Union level, given that those guidelines will apply generally to all TSOs.
(19)
The Agency for the Cooperation of Energy Regulators (the ‘Agency’) established by Regulation (EC) No 713/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council (12) is allocated important additional tasks under this Regulation and should be given the right to levy fees for some of these additional tasks.
(20)
Following close consultations with all Member States and stakeholders, the Commission has identified 12 strategic trans-European energy infrastructure priorities, the implementation of which by 2020 is essential for the achievement of the Union’s energy and climate policy objectives. These priorities cover different geographic regions or thematic areas in the field of electricity transmission and storage, gas transmission, storage and liquefied or compressed natural gas infrastructure, smart grids, electricity highways, carbon dioxide transport and oil infrastructure.
(21)
Projects of common interest should comply with common, transparent and objective criteria in view of their contribution to the energy policy objectives. For electricity and gas, in order to be eligible for inclusion in the second and subsequent Union lists, projects should be part of the latest available 10-year network development plan. This plan should notably take account of the conclusions of the European Council of 4 February 2011 with regard to the need to integrate peripheral energy markets.
(22)
Regional groups should be established for the purpose of proposing and reviewing projects of common interest, leading to the establishment of regional lists of projects of common interest. In order to ensure broad consensus, these regional groups should ensure close cooperation between Member States, national regulatory authorities, project promoters and relevant stakeholders. The cooperation should rely as much as possible on existing regional cooperation structures of national regulatory authorities and TSOs and other structures established by the Member States and the Commission. In the context of this cooperation, national regulatory authorities should, when necessary, advise the regional groups, inter alia on the feasibility of the regulatory aspects of proposed projects and on the feasibility of the proposed timetable for regulatory approval.
(23)
In order to ensure that the Union list of projects of common interest (‘Union list’) is limited to projects which contribute the most to the implementation of the strategic energy infrastructure priority corridors and areas, the power to adopt and review the Union list should be delegated to the Commission in accordance with Article 290 of the TFEU, while respecting the right of the Member States to approve projects of common interest related to their territory. According to analysis carried out in the impact assessment accompanying the proposal that has led to this Regulation, the number of such projects is estimated at some 100 in the field of electricity and 50 in the field of gas. Taking into account this estimate, and the need to ensure the achievement of the objectives of this Regulation, the total number of projects of common interest should remain manageable, and therefore should not significantly exceed 220. The Commission, when preparing and drawing up delegated acts, should ensure the simultaneous, timely and appropriate transmission of relevant documents to the European Parliament and to the Council.
(24)
A new Union list should be established every two years. Projects of common interest that are completed or that no longer fulfil the relevant criteria and requirements as set out in this Regulation should not appear on the next Union list. For that reason, existing projects of common interest that are to be included in the next Union list should be subject to the same selection process for the establishment of regional lists and for the establishment of the Union list as proposed projects; however, care should be taken to minimise the resulting administrative burden as much as possible, for example by using to the extent possible information submitted previously, and by taking account of the annual reports of the project promoters.
(25)
Projects of common interest should be implemented as quickly as possible and should be closely monitored and evaluated, while keeping the administrative burden for project promoters to a minimum. The Commission should nominate European coordinators for projects facing particular difficulties.
(26)
Permit granting processes should neither lead to administrative burdens which are disproportionate to the size or complexity of a project, nor create barriers to the development of the trans-European networks and market access. The conclusions of the Council of 19 February 2009 highlighted the need to identify and remove barriers to investment, including by means of streamlining of planning and consultation procedures. Those conclusions were reinforced by the conclusions of the European Council of 4 February 2011 which again underlined the importance of streamlining and improving permit granting processes while respecting national competences.
(27)
The planning and implementation of Union projects of common interest in the areas of energy, transport and telecommunication infrastructure should be coordinated to generate synergies whenever to do so makes sense from an overall economic, technical, environmental or spatial planning point of view and with due regard to the relevant safety aspects. Thus, when the various European networks are being planned, preference could be given to integrating transport, communication and energy networks in order to ensure that as little land as possible is taken up, whilst ensuring, where possible, that existing or disused routes are reused, in order to reduce to a minimum any negative social, economic, environmental and financial impact.
(28)
Projects of common interest should be given ‘priority status’ at national level to ensure rapid administrative treatment. Projects of common interest should be considered by competent authorities as being in the public interest. Authorisation should be given to projects which have an adverse impact on the environment, for reasons of overriding public interest, when all the conditions under Council Directive 92/43/EEC of 21 May 1992 on the conservation of natural habitats and of wild fauna and flora (13) and Directive 2000/60/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 October 2000 establishing a framework for Community action in the field of water policy (14) are met.
(29)
The establishment of a competent authority or authorities integrating or coordinating all permit granting processes (‘one-stop shop’) should reduce complexity, increase efficiency and transparency and help enhance cooperation among Member States. Upon their designation, the competent authorities should be operational as soon as possible.
(30)
Despite the existence of established standards for the participation of the public in environmental decision-making procedures, additional measures are needed to ensure the highest possible standards of transparency and public participation for all relevant issues in the permit granting process for projects of common interest.
(31)
The correct and coordinated implementation of Directive 2011/92/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 December 2011 on the assessment of the effects of certain public and private projects on the environment (15), of Directive 2001/42/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 June 2001 on the assessment of the effects of certain plans and programmes on the environment (16), where applicable, of the Convention on access to information, public participation in decision-making and access to justice in environmental matters, signed in Aarhus on 25 June 1998 (17) (the ‘Aarhus Convention’), and of the Espoo Convention on environmental impact assessment in a transboundary context (the ‘Espoo Convention’) should ensure the harmonisation of the main principles for the assessment of environmental effects, including in a cross-border context. Member States should coordinate their assessments for projects of common interest, and provide for joint assessments, where possible. Member States should be encouraged to exchange best practice and administrative capacity-building for permit granting processes.
(32)
It is important to streamline and improve permit granting processes, while respecting — to the extent possible with due regard to the principle of subsidiarity — national competences and procedures for the construction of new infrastructure. Given the urgency of developing energy infrastructures, the simplification of permit granting processes should be accompanied by a clear time-limit for the decision to be taken by the respective authorities regarding the construction of the project. That time limit should stimulate a more efficient definition and handling of procedures, and should under no circumstances compromise the high standards for the protection of the environment and public participation. With regard to the maximum time limits established by this Regulation, Member States could nevertheless strive to further shorten them if feasible. The competent authorities should ensure compliance with the time limits, and Member States should endeavour to ensure that appeals challenging the substantive or procedural legality of a comprehensive decision are handled in the most efficient way possible.
(33)
Where Member States consider it appropriate, they may include in the comprehensive decision decisions taken in the context of: negotiations with individual landowners to granting access to, ownership of, or a right to occupy property; spatial planning which determines the general land use of a defined region, includes other developments such as highways, railways, buildings and nature protection areas, and is not undertaken for the specific purpose of the planned project; granting of operational permits. In the context of the permit granting processes, a project of common interest could include related infrastructure to the extent that it is essential for the construction or functioning of the project.
(34)
This Regulation, in particular the provisions on permit granting, public participation and the implementation of projects of common interest, should apply without prejudice to international and Union law, including provisions to protect the environment and human health, and provisions adopted under the Common Fisheries and Maritime Policy.
(35)
The costs for the development, construction, operation and maintenance of projects of common interest should in general be fully borne by the users of the infrastructure. Projects of common interest should be eligible for cross-border cost allocation when an assessment of market demand or of the expected effects on the tariffs have indicated that costs cannot be expected to be recovered by the tariffs paid by the infrastructure users.
(36)
The basis for the discussion on the appropriate allocation of costs should be the analysis of the costs and benefits of an infrastructure project on the basis of a harmonised methodology for energy-system-wide analysis, in the framework of the 10-year network development plans prepared by the European Networks of Transmission System Operators under Regulation (EC) No 714/2009 and Regulation (EC) No 715/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 July 2009 on conditions for access to the natural gas transmission networks (18), and reviewed by the Agency. That analysis could take into consideration indicators and corresponding reference values for the comparison of unit investment costs.
(37)
In an increasingly integrated internal energy market, clear and transparent rules for cost allocation across borders are necessary in order to accelerate investment in cross-border infrastructure. The European Council of 4 February 2011 recalled the importance of promoting a regulatory framework attractive to investment in networks, with tariffs set at levels consistent with financing needs and the appropriate cost allocation for cross-border investments, while enhancing competition and competitiveness and taking account of the impact on consumers. When deciding on cross-border cost allocation, national regulatory authorities should ensure that its impact on national tariffs does not represent a disproportionate burden for consumers. The national regulatory authorities should also avoid the risks of double support for projects by taking into account actual or estimated charges and revenues. Those charges and revenues should be taken into account only insofar as they are designed to cover the costs concerned and as much as possible related to the projects. When an investment request takes into account benefits beyond the borders of the Member States concerned, the national regulatory authorities should consult the TSOs concerned on the project-specific cost-benefit analysis.
(38)
The existing internal energy market law requires that tariffs for access to gas and electricity networks provide appropriate incentives for investment. When applying the internal energy market law, national regulatory authorities should ensure a stable and predictable regulatory framework with incentives for projects of common interest, including long-term incentives, that are commensurate with the level of specific risk of the project. This applies in particular to innovative transmission technologies for electricity allowing for large scale integration of renewable energy, of distributed energy resources or of demand response in interconnected networks, and to gas transmission infrastructure offering advanced capacity or additional flexibility to the market to allow for short-term trading or back-up supply in case of supply disruptions.
(39)
This Regulation applies only to the granting of permits for, public participation in, and the regulatory treatment of projects of common interest within the meaning set out herein. Member States may nevertheless apply, by virtue of their national law, the same or similar rules to other projects which do not have the status of projects of common interest within the scope of this Regulation. As regards the regulatory incentives, Member States may apply, by virtue of their national law, the same or similar rules to projects of common interest falling under the category of electricity storage.
(40)
Member States that currently do not provide for a legal status of the highest national significance possible that is attributable to energy infrastructure projects in the context of permit granting processes should consider introducing such a status, in particular by evaluating if this would lead to a quicker permit granting process.
(41)
The European Energy Programme for Recovery (EEPR), established by Regulation (EC) No 663/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council (19) has demonstrated the added value of leveraging private funding through significant Union financial assistance to allow the implementation of projects of European significance. The European Council of 4 February 2011 recognised that some energy infrastructure projects may require limited public finance to leverage private funding. In the light of the economic and financial crisis and budgetary constraints, targeted support, through grants and financial instruments, should be developed under the next multiannual financial framework, which will attract new investors into the energy infrastructure priority corridors and areas, while keeping the budgetary contribution of the Union to a minimum. The relevant measures should draw on the experience gained during the pilot phase following the introduction of project bonds to finance infrastructure projects.
(42)
Projects of common interest in the fields of electricity, gas and carbon dioxide should be eligible to receive Union financial assistance for studies and, under certain conditions, for works as soon as such funding becomes available under the relevant Regulation on a Connecting Europe Facility in the form of grants or in the form of innovative financial instruments. This will ensure that tailor-made support can be provided to those projects of common interest which are not viable under the existing regulatory framework and market conditions. It is important to avoid any distortion of competition, in particular between projects contributing to the achievement of the same Union priority corridor. Such financial assistance should ensure the necessary synergies with the Structural Funds, which will finance smart energy distribution networks of local or regional importance. A three-step logic applies to investments in projects of common interest. First, the market should have the priority to invest. Second, if investments are not made by the market, regulatory solutions should be explored, if necessary the relevant regulatory framework should be adjusted, and the correct application of the relevant regulatory framework should be ensured. Third, where the first two steps are not sufficient to deliver the necessary investments in projects of common interest, Union financial assistance could be granted if the project of common interest fulfils the applicable eligibility criteria.
(43)
Since the objective of this Regulation, namely the development and interoperability of trans-European energy networks and connection to such networks, cannot be sufficiently achieved by the Member States and can therefore be better achieved at Union level, the Union may adopt measures, in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity as set out in Article 5 of the Treaty on European Union. In accordance with the principle of proportionality, as set out in that Article, this Regulation does not go beyond what is necessary in order to achieve that objective.
(44)
Regulations (EC) No 713/2009, (EC) No 714/2009 and (EC) No 715/2009 should therefore be amended accordingly.
(45)
Decision No 1364/2006/EC should therefore be repealed,
HAVE ADOPTED THIS REGULATION:
