Article 229
Award procedure
1.   Applications for contributions shall be duly submitted within the time limit, in writing, including, where appropriate, in a secure electronic format.
2.   Contributions shall not be awarded to applicants who, at the time of the award procedure, are in one or more of the situations referred to in Articles 138(1) and 143(1) and those who are registered as excluded in the database referred to in Article 144.
3.   Applicants shall be required to certify that they are not in one of the situations referred to in paragraph 2.
4.   The authorising officer responsible may be assisted by a committee to evaluate the applications for contributions. The authorising officer responsible shall specify the rules regarding the composition, appointment and functioning of such committee, and the rules to prevent any conflict of interests.
5.   Applications that comply with the eligibility and exclusion criteria shall be selected on the basis of the award criteria set out in Article 19 of Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 1141/2014.
6.   The decision of the authorising officer responsible on the applications shall state at least:
(a)
the subject and the overall amount of the contributions;
(b)
the name of the selected applicants and the amounts accepted for each of them;
(c)
the names of any applicants rejected and the reasons for that rejection.
7.   The authorising officer responsible shall inform applicants in writing of the decision on their applications. If the application for funding is rejected or the amounts requested are not awarded in part or in full, the authorising officer responsible shall give the reasons for either the rejection of the application or the non-award of the amounts requested, with reference in particular to the eligibility and award criteria referred to in paragraph 5 of this Article and Article 228(4). If the application is rejected, the authorising officer responsible shall inform the applicant of the available means of administrative and/or judicial redress as provided for in Article 134(2).
8.   Contributions shall be covered by a written agreement.
