Article 186
Checks and controls on beneficiaries related to lump sums, unit costs and flat rates
1.   The authorising officer responsible shall check, at the latest before the payment of the balance:
(a)
the fulfilment of the conditions triggering the payment of lump sums, unit costs or flat-rates, including, where required, the achievement of outputs and/or results;
(b)
that the lump sums, unit costs or flat rates were indicated in the estimated overall budget of the action or work programme;
(c)
that the conditions referred to in point (a) were fulfilled during the duration of the action or the work programme.
In addition, the fulfilment of those conditions may be subject to ex post controls.
The amounts of lump sums, unit costs or flat-rate financing determined ex ante by application of the method authorised by the authorising officer responsible or the Commission in accordance with Article 184 shall not be challenged by ex post controls. This is without prejudice to the right of the authorising officer responsible to check that the conditions triggering the payment as referred to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph are fulfilled, and to reduce the grant in accordance with Article 132(4) where those conditions are not fulfilled or in the event of irregularity, fraud or a breach of other obligations. Where lump sums, unit costs or flat rates are established on the basis of the usual cost accounting practices of the beneficiary Article 188(2) shall apply.
2.   The frequency and scope of checks and controls may depend, inter alia, upon the nature of the action or the beneficiary, including past irregularities or fraud attributable to that beneficiary.
3.   The conditions triggering the payment of lump sums, unit costs or flat-rates shall not require reporting on the costs actually incurred by the beneficiary.
4.   Payment of the grant on the basis of lump sums, unit costs or flat-rate financing shall not affect the right of access to the statutory records of the beneficiaries for the purposes referred to in Articles 129 and 187.
