Article 139
Declaration and evidence of absence of an exclusion situation
1.   A participant shall declare whether it is in one of the situations referred to in Articles 138(1) and 143(1), and, where applicable, whether it has taken any remedial measures referred to in Article 138(9), first subparagraph, point (a).
A participant shall also declare whether the following persons or entities are in one of the exclusion situations referred to in Article 138(1), points (c) to (h):
(a)
natural or legal persons that are members of the administrative, management or supervisory body of the participant or that have powers of representation, decision or control with regard to that participant;
(b)
beneficial owners, as defined in Article 3, point (6), of Directive (EU) 2015/849, of the participant.
The participant or the recipient shall without delay inform the authorising officer responsible of any changes in the situations as declared.
Where appropriate, the candidate or tenderer shall provide the same declarations referred to in the first and second subparagraphs signed by a subcontractor or by any other entity on whose capacity it intends to rely, as the case may be.
The authorising officer responsible shall not request the declarations referred to in the first and second subparagraph when such declarations have already been submitted for the purposes of another award procedure, provided that the situation has not changed, and that the time that has elapsed since the issuing date of the declarations does not exceed one year.
The authorising officer responsible may waive the requirements under the first and second subparagraphs for very low value grants and very low value contracts, the value of which does not exceed the amounts referred to in Article 2, point (75), and point 14.4 of Annex I.
2.   Whenever requested by the authorising officer responsible and where this is necessary to ensure the proper conduct of the procedure, the participant, the subcontractor or the entity on whose capacity a candidate or tenderer intends to rely shall provide:
(a)
appropriate evidence that it is not in one of the exclusion situations referred to in Article 138(1);
(b)
information on natural or legal persons that are members of the administrative, management or supervisory body of the participant or that have powers of representation, decision or control with regard to that participant, including persons and entities within the ownership and control structure and beneficial owners, and appropriate evidence that none of those persons are in one of the exclusion situations referred to in Article 138(1), points (c) to (f).
(c)
appropriate evidence that natural or legal persons that assume unlimited liability for the debts of that participant are not in an exclusion situation referred to in Article 138(1), point (a) or (b).
3.   Where applicable and in accordance with national law, the authorising officer responsible may accept as appropriate evidence that a participant or an entity referred to in paragraph 2 is not in one of the exclusion situations referred to in Article 138(1), points (a), (c), (d), (f), (g) and (h), a recent extract from the judicial record or, failing that, an equivalent document recently issued by a judicial or administrative authority in its country of establishment showing that those requirements are satisfied.
The authorising officer responsible may accept as appropriate evidence that a participant or an entity referred to in paragraph 2 is not in one of the exclusion situations referred to in Article 138(1), points (a) and (b), a recent certificate issued by the competent authority of the country of establishment. Where such types of certificates are not issued in the country of establishment, the participant may provide a sworn statement made before a judicial authority or notary or, failing that, a solemn statement made before an administrative authority or a qualified professional body in its country of establishment.
4.   The authorising officer responsible shall waive the obligation of a participant or an entity referred to in paragraph 2 to submit the documentary evidence referred to in paragraphs 2 and 3:
(a)
if he or she can access such evidence on a national database free of charge;
(b)
if such evidence has already been submitted for the purposes of another procedure and provided that any submitted documents are still valid and that the time that has elapsed since the issuing date of the documents does not exceed one year;
(c)
if he or she recognises that there is a material impossibility to provide such evidence.
5.   Paragraphs 1 to 4 of this Article shall not apply to persons and entities implementing Union funds pursuant to Article 62(1), first subparagraph, point (c), or to Union bodies referred to in Articles 70 and 71.
For financial instruments and budgetary guarantees and in the absence of rules and procedures fully equivalent to those referred to in Article 157(4), first subparagraph, point (d), final recipients and intermediaries shall provide the person or entity implementing Union funds pursuant to Article 62(1), first subparagraph, point (c), with a signed declaration on honour confirming that they are not in one of the situations referred to in Article 138(1), points (a) to (d), (g) and (h), or Article 143(1), first subparagraph, points (b) and (c), or in a situation deemed equivalent following the assessment carried out in accordance with Article 157(4).
Where, exceptionally, financial instruments are implemented pursuant to Article 62(1), first subparagraph, point (a), final recipients shall provide financial intermediaries with a signed declaration on honour confirming that they are not in one of the situations referred to in Article 138(1), points (a) to (d), (g) and (h), or Article 143(1), first subparagraph, points (b) and (c).
