Article 93
Treatment of financial irregularities on the part of a member of staff
1.   Without prejudice to the powers of OLAF and to the administrative autonomy of Union institutions, Union bodies, European offices or bodies or persons entrusted with the implementation of specific actions in the CFSP pursuant to Title V of the TEU in respect of members of their staff and with due regard to the protection of whistle-blowers, any infringement of this Regulation, or of a provision relating to financial management or the checking of operations, resulting from an act or omission of a member of staff shall be referred for an opinion to the panel referred to in Article 145, by any of the following:
(a)
the appointing authority in charge of disciplinary matters;
(b)
the authorising officer responsible, including Heads of Union delegations and their deputies in their absence acting as authorising officers by subdelegation in accordance with Article 60(2).
Where the panel is directly informed of a matter by a member of staff, it shall transmit the file to the appointing authority of the Union institution, Union body, European office or body or person concerned and shall inform the member of staff accordingly. The appointing authority may request the panel’s opinion on the case.
2.   A request for an opinion of the panel pursuant to the paragraph 1, first subparagraph, shall be accompanied by a description of the facts and the act or omission which the panel is asked to assess, as well as by relevant supporting documents, including reports of any investigation which has taken place. Wherever possible, the information shall be produced in anonymised form.
Before submitting a request or any additional information to the panel, the appointing authority or the authorising officer, as appropriate, shall give the member of staff involved the opportunity to submit its observations, after having notified to him or her the supporting documents referred to in the first subparagraph, insofar as that notification does not seriously undermine the pursuit of further investigations.
3.   In the cases referred in paragraph 1 of this Article, the panel referred to in Article 145 shall be competent to assess whether, on the basis of the elements submitted to it pursuant to paragraph 2 of this Article and any additional information received, a financial irregularity has occurred. On the basis of the opinion of the panel, the Union institution, Union body, European office or body or person concerned shall decide on the appropriate follow-up actions in accordance with the Staff Regulations. If the panel detects systemic problems, it shall make a recommendation to the authorising officer and to the authorising officer by delegation, unless the latter is the member of staff involved, as well as to the internal auditor.
4.   Where the panel gives the opinion referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article, it shall be composed of the members referred to in Article 145(2), first subparagraph, points (a) and (b) as well as the following additional members, which shall be appointed taking into account the need for avoiding any conflicts of interests:
(a)
a representative of the appointing authority in charge of disciplinary matters of the Union institution, Union body, European office or body or person concerned when the case is referred in accordance with paragraph 1, first subparagraph, point (a), or a representative of the authorising officer responsible when the case is referred in accordance with paragraph 1, first subparagraph, point (b);
(b)
a member appointed by the staff committee of the Union institution, Union body, European office or body or person concerned;
(c)
a member of the legal service of the Union institution employing the member of staff concerned.
Where the panel gives the opinion referred to in paragraph 1, it shall be addressed to the appointing authority of the Union institution, Union body, European office or body or person concerned.
5.   The panel shall have no investigative powers. The Union institution, Union body, European office or body or person concerned shall cooperate with the panel with a view to ensuring that it has all the information necessary for giving its opinion.
6.   Where the panel considers that the case is a matter for OLAF, it shall in accordance with paragraph 1 transmit the file to the relevant appointing authority without delay and inform OLAF immediately.
7.   The Member States shall fully support the Union in the enforcement of any liability, under Article 22 of the Staff Regulations, of temporary staff to whom Article 2, point (e), of the Conditions of Employment of Other Servants of the European Union applies.
