Article 110
Financing decisions
1.   A budgetary commitment shall be preceded by a financing decision adopted by the Union institution or by the authority to which powers have been delegated by the Union institution. The financing decisions shall be annual or multiannual.
The first subparagraph of this paragraph shall not apply in the case of appropriations for the operations of each Union institution under its administrative autonomy that can be implemented without a basic act in accordance with Article 58(2), point (e), of administrative support expenditure and of contributions to the Union bodies referred to in Articles 70 and 71.
2.   The financing decision shall at the same time constitute the annual or multiannual work programme and shall be adopted, as appropriate, as soon as possible after the adoption of the draft budget and in principle no later than 31 March of the year of implementation. Where the relevant basic act provides for specific modalities for the adoption of a financing decision or a work programme or both, those modalities shall be applied to the part of the financing decision constituting the work programme, in compliance with the requirements of that basic act. The part which constitutes the work programme shall be published on the website of the Union institution concerned immediately after its adoption and prior to its implementation.
The financing decision shall indicate the total amount it covers and shall contain a description of the actions to be financed. It shall specify:
(a)
the basic act and the budget line;
(b)
the objectives pursued and the expected results;
(c)
the methods of implementation;
(d)
any additional information required by the basic act for the work programme.
3.   In addition to the elements referred to in paragraph 2, the financing decision shall set out the following:
(a)
for grants: the type of applicants targeted by the call for proposals or direct award and the global budgetary envelope reserved for the grants;
(b)
for procurement: the global budgetary envelope reserved for procurements;
(c)
for contributions to Union trust funds referred to in Article 238: the appropriations reserved for the trust fund for the year together with the amounts planned over its duration, from the budget as well as from other donors;
(d)
for prizes: the type of participants targeted by the contest, the global budgetary envelope reserved for the contest and a specific reference to prizes with a unit value of EUR 1 000 000 or more;
(e)
for financial instruments: the amount allocated to the financial instrument;
(f)
in the event of indirect management: the person or entity implementing Union funds pursuant to Article 62(1), first subparagraph, point (c), or the criteria to be used to select the person or entity;
(g)
for contributions to blending facilities or platforms: the amount allocated to the blending facility or platform and the list of entities participating in the blending facility or platform;
(h)
for budgetary guarantees: the amount of annual provisioning and, where applicable, the amount of the budgetary guarantee to be released.
4.   The authorising officer by delegation may add any additional information considered appropriate either in the respective financing decision constituting the work programme or in any other document published on the website of the Union institution.
A multiannual financing decision shall be consistent with the financial programming referred to in Article 41(2) and shall specify that the implementation of the decision is subject to the availability of budget appropriations for the respective financial years after the adoption of the budget or as provided for in the system of provisional twelfths.
5.   Without prejudice to any specific provision of a basic act, any substantial change in a financing decision already adopted shall follow the same procedure as the initial decision.
