Article 226
Principles
1.   Contributions shall be used to reimburse only the percentage set out in Article 17(4) of Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 1141/2014 of the operating costs of European political parties directly linked to objectives of those parties, as specified in Article 17(5) and Article 21 of that Regulation.
2.   Contributions may be used to reimburse expenditure relating to contracts concluded by European political parties, provided that there were no conflicts of interests when they were awarded.
3.   Contributions shall not be used to directly or indirectly grant any personal advantage, in cash or in kind, to any individual member or member of staff of a European political party. Contributions shall not be used to directly or indirectly finance activities of third parties, in particular national political parties or political foundations at European or national level, whether in the form of grants, donations, loans or any other similar agreements. For the purposes of this paragraph, associated entities of European political parties shall not be regarded as third parties, where such entities are part of the administrative organisation of European political parties as set out in the statutes of the latter. Contributions shall not be used for any of the purposes excluded by Article 22 of Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 1141/2014.
4.   Contributions shall be subject to the principles of transparency and equal treatment, in accordance with the criteria laid down in Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 1141/2014.
5.   Contributions shall be awarded by the European Parliament on an annual basis and shall be published in accordance with Article 38(1) to (4) of this Regulation and with Article 32(1) of Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 1141/2014.
6.   European political parties receiving a contribution shall not directly or indirectly receive other funding from the budget. In particular, donations from the budgets of political groups in the European Parliament shall be prohibited. In no circumstances shall the same expenditure be financed twice by the budget.
Contributions shall be without prejudice to the ability of the European political parties to build up reserves with amounts from their own resources in accordance with Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 1141/2014.
7.   If a European political foundation as defined in Article 2, point (4), of Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 1141/2014 realises a surplus of income over expenditure at the end of a financial year in which it received an operating grant, the part of that surplus corresponding to up to 25 % of the total income for that year may be carried over to the following year provided that it is used before the end of the first quarter of that following year.
