Article 21
Assigned revenue
1.   External assigned revenue and internal assigned revenue shall be used to finance specific items of expenditure.
2.   The following shall constitute external assigned revenue:
(a)
specific additional financial contributions from Member States including voluntary contributions to Union programmes, instruments and activities;
(b)
appropriations relating to the revenue generated by the Research Fund for Coal and Steel established by Protocol No 37 on the financial consequences of the expiry of the ECSC Treaty and on the Research Fund for Coal and Steel, annexed to the TEU and to the TFEU.
(c)
the interest on deposits and the fines provided for in Council Regulation (EC) No 1467/97 (43);
(d)
revenue earmarked for a specific purpose, such as income from foundations, subsidies, gifts and bequests, including the earmarked revenue specific to each Union institution;
(e)
financial contributions to Union activities from third countries or from bodies other than those set up under the TFEU or the Euratom Treaty;
(f)
internal assigned revenue referred to in paragraph 3, to the extent that it is ancillary to external assigned revenue referred to in this paragraph;
(g)
revenue from the activities of a competitive nature conducted by the Joint Research Centre (JRC) which consist of any of the following:
(i)
grant and procurement procedures in which the JRC participates;
(ii)
activities of the JRC on behalf of third parties;
(iii)
activities undertaken under an administrative agreement with other Union institutions or other Commission departments, in accordance with Article 59, for the provision of technical-scientific services.
3.   The following shall constitute internal assigned revenue:
(a)
revenue from third parties in respect of goods, services or work supplied at their request;
(b)
revenue arising from the repayment, in accordance with Article 101, of amounts wrongly paid;
(c)
proceeds from the supply of goods, services and works to other departments within an Union institution, or to other Union institutions or bodies, including refunds by other Union institutions or bodies of mission allowances paid on their behalf;
(d)
insurance payments received;
(e)
revenue from lettings and from the sale of buildings and land;
(f)
repayments to financial instruments or budgetary guarantees pursuant to Article 212(3), second subparagraph;
(g)
revenue arising from subsequent reimbursement of taxes pursuant to Article 27(3), first subparagraph, point (b).
4.   Assigned revenue shall be carried over and transferred in accordance with Article 12(4), points (b) and (c), and with Article 32.
5.   A basic act may assign the revenue for which it provides to specific items of expenditure. Unless otherwise specified in the basic act, such revenue shall constitute internal assigned revenue.
6.   The budget shall include lines to accommodate external assigned revenue and internal assigned revenue and shall, wherever possible, indicate the amount.
