Article 113
Commitments for EAGF appropriations
1.   For each financial year, the EAGF appropriations shall include non-differentiated appropriations for expenditure related to measures referred to in Article 5(2) of Regulation (EU) 2021/2116. Expenditure related to the measures referred to in Article 5(3) and Article 7 of that Regulation, with the exception of measures financed under non-operational technical assistance and contributions to executive agencies, shall be covered by differentiated appropriations.
2.   The Commission decisions fixing the amount of reimbursement of expenditure related to the EAGF incurred by Member States may constitute global provisional budgetary commitments, which shall not exceed the total appropriations entered in the budget for the EAGF.
3.   Global provisional budgetary commitments for the EAGF which have been made for a financial year and which have not given rise to a commitment on specific budget lines by 1 February of the following financial year shall be decommitted in respect of the financial year concerned.
4.   Where a global provisional budgetary commitment referred to in paragraph 2 is constituted, expenditure effected by the authorities and bodies referred to in the rules relating to the EAGF shall, within two months of receipt of the statements sent by Member States, be the subject of a commitment by chapter, article and item. Such commitments may be made after the expiry of that two-month period where a procedure for a transfer of appropriations concerning the relevant budget lines is necessary. Except where payment has not yet been made by Member States or where eligibility is in doubt, the amounts shall be charged as payments within the same two-month period.
The commitments referred to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph shall be deducted from the global provisional budgetary commitment referred to in paragraph 2.
5.   Paragraphs 2 and 3 shall apply subject to the examination and acceptance of the accounts.
