Article 184
Lump sums, unit costs and flat-rate financing
1.   Where the grant takes the form of lump sums, unit costs or flat-rate financing as referred to in Article 125(1), first subparagraph, point (c), (d) or (e), of this Title shall apply, with the exception of the provisions or parts of the provisions related to the verification of eligible costs actually incurred.
2.   Where possible and appropriate, lump sums, unit costs or flat rates shall be determined in such a way as to allow their payment upon achievement of concrete outputs and/or results.
3.   Unless otherwise provided in the basic act, the use of lump sums, unit costs or flat-rate financing shall be authorised by a decision of the authorising officer responsible, who shall act in accordance with the internal rules of the Union institution concerned.
4.   The authorisation decision shall contain at least the following:
(a)
justification concerning the appropriateness of such forms of financing with regard to the nature of the supported actions or work programmes, as well as to the risks of irregularities and fraud and costs of control;
(b)
identification of the costs or categories of costs covered by lump sums, unit costs or flat-rate financing, which shall be considered eligible in accordance with Article 189(3), points (c), (e) and (f), and Article 189(4), and which shall exclude ineligible costs under the applicable Union rules;
(c)
description of the methods for determining lump sums, unit costs or flat-rate financing. Those methods shall be based on one of the following:
(i)
statistical data, similar objective means or an expert judgement provided by internally available experts or procured in accordance with the applicable rules; or
(ii)
beneficiary-by-beneficiary approach, by reference to certified or auditable historical data of the beneficiary or to its usual cost accounting practices;
(d)
where possible, the essential conditions triggering the payment, including, where applicable, the achievement of outputs and/or results;
(e)
where lump sums, unit costs and flat rates are not output based and/or result based, a justification on why an output based and/or result based approach is not possible or appropriate.
The methods referred to in the first subparagraph, point (c), shall ensure:
(a)
the respect for the principle of sound financial management, in particular the appropriateness of the respective amounts with regard to the required outputs and/or results taking into account foreseeable revenue to be generated by the actions or work programmes;
(b)
reasonable compliance with the principles of co-financing and no double funding.
5.   The authorisation decision shall apply for the duration of the programme or programmes unless otherwise provided in that decision.
The authorisation decision may cover the use of lump sums, unit costs or flat rates applicable to more than one specific funding programme where the nature of the activities or of the expenditure allow for a common approach. In such cases, the authorising decision may be adopted by the following:
(a)
the authorising officers responsible where all activities concerned fall under their responsibility;
(b)
the Commission where this is appropriate in view of the nature of the activities or of the expenditure or in view of the number of authorising officers concerned.
6.   The authorising officer responsible may authorise or impose, in the form of flat-rates, funding of the beneficiary’s indirect costs up to a maximum of 7 % of total eligible direct costs for the action. A higher flat rate may be authorised by a reasoned Commission decision. The authorising officer responsible shall report in the annual activity report referred to in Article 74(9) on any such decision taken, the flat rate authorised and the reasons leading to that decision.
7.   SME owners and other natural persons who do not receive a salary may declare eligible personnel costs for the work carried out by themselves under an action or work programme, on the basis of unit costs authorised in accordance with paragraphs 1 to 6.
8.   Beneficiaries may declare personnel costs for the work carried out by volunteers under an action or work programme, on the basis of unit costs authorised in accordance with paragraphs 1 to 6.
