Article 240
Union contributions to global initiatives
1.   With a view to appropriately coordinating actions with multiple partners to address global challenges, the Union may make contributions in the form of financing not linked to costs to multi-donor, pooled funded global initiatives when these support the achievement of Union policy objectives and where other budget implementation instruments would not be sufficient to achieve such objectives. Where possible and appropriate, the Commission shall join any governance board or equivalent steering committee.
2.   Prior to any decision to contribute to a global initiative and as early as possible, the Commission shall inform the European Parliament and the Council about the amount of the contribution to the global initiative under the relevant basic act, explaining the reasons and appropriateness of the contribution, including how the contribution would provide visibility for the Union through the Union funding.
3.   Union contributions to global initiatives shall be subject to the following conditions, taking into account the nature of the Union financing:
(a)
the Union contribution is a minority contribution to the initiative, taking into account the global amount contributed to the initiative at the time of the contribution;
(b)
the Union contribution is treated on equal footing with donors of a similar magnitude and, where one or several Member States also contribute to the initiative, the Union contribution benefits from a level of protection no less favourable than the contribution(s) of that or those Member States;
(c)
there is adequate reporting on the results achieved by the initiative, including through relevant output and impact indicators;
(d)
the initiative operates under rules ensuring sound financial management, transparency, non-discrimination and equal treatment in the use of Union funds in accordance with the principle of proportionality;
(e)
there are appropriate internal and external systems to prevent and combat irregularities and fraud as well as to report on their functioning at regular intervals, and there are appropriate rules for the recovery of funds by the initiative, including the use of such funds for the same initiative.
In the event of suspected cases of serious irregularities such as fraud, corruption or conflict of interests, the authorising officer responsible, the EPPO in respect of those Member States participating in enhanced cooperation pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2017/1939, OLAF, audit authorities of the Commission and the Court of Auditors shall, under the rules of the initiative, be provided with relevant information and carry out joint audit, control, or investigative missions with the relevant body under the initiative, in line with Article 129.
4.   A justification of the conditions set out in paragraph 3, first subparagraph, shall be included in the financing decision to contribute to the initiative.
5.   The procedure laid down in Article 157(6) shall apply mutatis mutandis to the Union contribution to the global initiative.
