Article 238
Union trust funds for external actions
1.   For emergency and post-emergency actions necessary to react to a crisis, or for thematic actions, the Commission may establish Union trust funds for external actions (Union trust funds) under an agreement concluded with other donors.
Union trust funds shall only be established where agreements with other donors have secured contributions from other sources than the budget.
The Commission shall consult the European Parliament and the Council on its intention to establish a Union trust fund for emergency and post-emergency actions.
The establishment of a Union trust fund for thematic actions shall be subject to the approval of the European Parliament and of the Council.
For the purposes of the third and fourth subparagraphs of this paragraph, the Commission shall make available to the European Parliament and to the Council its draft decisions concerning the establishment of a Union trust fund. Such draft decisions shall include a description of the objectives of the Union trust fund, the justification for its establishment in accordance with paragraph 3, an indication of its duration and the preliminary agreements with other donors. The draft decisions shall also include a draft constitutive agreement to be concluded with other donors.
2.   The Commission shall submit its draft decisions concerning the financing of a Union trust fund to the competent committee where provided for in the basic act under which the Union contribution to the Union trust fund is provided. The competent committee shall not be invited to pronounce itself on the aspects which have already been submitted to the European Parliament and to the Council for consultation or for approval under the third, fourth and fifth subparagraphs of paragraph 1 respectively.
3.   Union trust funds shall only be established and implemented subject to the following conditions:
(a)
there is added value of the Union intervention: the objectives of Union trust funds, in particular by reason of their scale or potential effects, may be better achieved at Union level than at national level and the use of the existing financing instruments would not be sufficient to achieve policy objectives of the Union;
(b)
Union trust funds bring clear political visibility for the Union and managerial advantages as well as better control by the Union of risks and disbursements of the Union and other donors’ contributions;
(c)
Union trust funds do not duplicate other existing funding channels or similar instruments without providing any additionality;
(d)
the objectives of Union trust funds are aligned with the objectives of the Union instrument or budgetary item from which they are funded.
4.   A board chaired by the Commission shall be established for each Union trust fund to ensure a fair representation of the donors and to decide upon the use of the funds. The board shall include a representative of each non-contributing Member State as an observer. The rules for the composition of the board and its internal rules shall be laid down in the constitutive agreement of the Union trust fund. Those rules shall include the requirement that a vote in favour by the Commission is needed for the final adoption of the decision on the use of the funds.
5.   Union trust funds shall be established for a limited duration as determined in their constitutive agreement. That duration may be extended by a decision of the Commission subject to the procedure set out in paragraph 1 upon request of the board of the Union trust fund concerned and upon presentation by the Commission of a report justifying the extension, confirming, in particular, that the conditions set out in paragraph 3 are complied with.
The European Parliament and/or the Council may request the Commission to discontinue appropriations for a Union trust fund or to revise the constitutive agreement with a view to the liquidation of a Union trust fund, where appropriate in particular on the basis of the information submitted in the working document referred to in Article 41(6). In such an event, any remaining funds shall be returned on a pro rata basis to the budget as general revenue and to the contributing Member States and other donors.
