Article 205
Amount of the grant and extension of audit findings
1.   The amount of the grant shall not become final until after the authorising officer responsible has approved the final reports and, where applicable, the accounts, without prejudice to subsequent audits, checks and investigations by the Union institution concerned, OLAF or the Court of Auditors. Article 132(4) shall apply also after the amount of the grant has become final.
2.   Where controls or audits demonstrate systemic or recurrent irregularities, fraud or a breach of obligations attributable to the beneficiary and having a material impact on a number of grants awarded to that beneficiary under similar conditions, the authorising officer responsible may suspend the implementation of the grant agreement or payments under all the grants concerned or, where appropriate, terminate the grant agreements concerned with that beneficiary, having regard to the seriousness of the findings.
The authorising officer responsible may, in addition, reduce the grants, reject ineligible costs and recover amounts unduly paid in respect of all the grants affected by the systemic or recurrent irregularities, fraud or breach of obligations referred to in the first subparagraph that may be subject to audits, checks and investigations in accordance with the grant agreements affected.
3.   The authorising officer responsible shall determine the amounts to be reduced or recovered, wherever possible and practicable, on the basis of costs unduly declared as eligible for each grant concerned, following acceptance of the revised reports and financial statements submitted by the beneficiary.
4.   Where it is not possible or practicable to quantify precisely the amount of ineligible costs for each grant concerned, the amounts to be reduced or recovered may be determined by extrapolating the reduction or recovery rate applied to the grants for which the systemic or recurrent irregularities, fraud or breach of obligations have been demonstrated, or, where ineligible costs cannot serve as a basis for determining the amounts to be reduced or recovered, by applying a flat rate, having regard to the principle of proportionality. The beneficiary shall be given the opportunity to propose a duly substantiated alternative method or rate before the reduction or recovery is made.
