Article 105
Limitation period
1.   Without prejudice to the provisions of specific regulations and the application of Decision (EU, Euratom) 2020/2053, entitlements of the Union in respect of third parties and entitlements of third parties in respect of the Union shall be subject to a limitation period of five years.
2.   The limitation period for entitlements of the Union in respect of third parties shall begin to run on the expiry of the deadline referred to in Article 98(4), first subparagraph, point (b).
The limitation period for entitlements of third parties in respect of the Union shall begin to run on the date on which the payment of the third party’s entitlement is due according to the corresponding legal commitment.
3.   The limitation period for entitlements of the Union in respect of third parties shall be interrupted by any act of a Union institution or a Member State acting at the request of a Union institution, notified to the third party and aiming at recovering the debt.
The limitation period for entitlements of third parties in respect of the Union shall be interrupted by any act notified to the Union by its creditors or on behalf of its creditors aiming at recovering the debt.
4.   A new limitation period of five years shall begin to run on the day following the interruptions referred to in paragraph 3.
5.   Any legal action relating to an entitlement as referred to in paragraph 2, including actions brought before a court which later declares itself not to have jurisdiction, shall interrupt the limitation period. A new limitation period of five years shall not begin to run until a judgment having the force of res judicata is given or there is an extrajudicial settlement between the same parties on the same action.
6.   Where the accounting officer allows the debtor additional time for payment in accordance with Article 104, this shall be considered as an interruption of the limitation period. A new limitation period of five years shall begin to run on the day following the expiry of the extended time for payment.
7.   Entitlements of the Union shall not be recovered after the expiry of the limitation period, as provided for in paragraphs 2 to 6.
