Article 143
Rejection from an award procedure
1.   The authorising officer responsible shall reject from an award procedure a participant who:
(a)
is in an exclusion situation established in accordance with Article 138;
(b)
has misrepresented the information required as a condition for participating in the procedure or has failed to supply that information;
(c)
was previously involved in the preparation of documents used in the award procedure where this entails a breach of the principle of equality of treatment, including distortion of competition, that cannot be remedied otherwise;
(d)
has professional conflicting interests which may negatively affect the performance of the contract in accordance with point 20.6 of Annex I;
(e)
is the addressee of a decision prohibiting the award of the contract for having received foreign subsidies distorting the internal market, adopted by the Commission in accordance with paragraph 3 of this Article.
The authorising officer responsible shall communicate to the other participants in the award procedure the relevant information exchanged in the context of or resulting from the involvement of the participant in the preparation of the award procedure as referred to in the first subparagraph, point (c). Prior to any such rejection the participant shall be given the opportunity to prove that its involvement in preparing the award procedure does not breach the principle of equality of treatment.
2.   Article 134(1) shall apply unless the rejection has been justified in accordance with paragraph 1, first subparagraph, point (a), of this Article by a decision concerning exclusion taken with regard to the participant, following an examination of its observations.
3.   For the purpose of paragraph 1, point (e), of this Article, Regulation (EU) 2022/2560 and in particular the provisions of its Chapters 1, 2 and 4, including Article 30 thereof, shall apply mutatis mutandis to the preliminary review by the Commission and to the in-depth investigation of any foreign financial contributions obtained in a procurement procedure under this Regulation. For the purpose of the prior notification to the contracting authority, participants in a procurement procedure under this Regulation shall notify any relevant foreign financial contribution to the authorising officer responsible, under the same conditions as set out in Articles 28 and 29 of Regulation (EU) 2022/2560 and in the provisions of the implementing acts adopted on the basis of Article 47(1) of that Regulation. In addition, relevant delegated acts adopted on the basis of Article 49 of Regulation (EU) 2022/2560 shall also be applicable to procurement procedures under this Regulation. The relevant provisions of Regulation (EU) 2022/2560, as well as those of the delegated acts adopted on the basis of Article 49 of that Regulation and of the implementing acts adopted on the basis of Article 47(1) of that Regulation shall be implemented in accordance with this Regulation.
In the context of the first subparagraph of this paragraph, the Commission shall be empowered to adopt implementing acts in the form of a decision:
(a)
to make the commitments offered by a participant binding upon that participant within the meaning of Article 11(3) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2560, in the context of this Regulation;
(b)
to raise no objection within the meaning of Article 11(4) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2560, in the context of this Regulation;
(c)
to prohibit the award of the contract to a participant for having received foreign subsidies distorting the internal market within the meaning of Article 31(2) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2560, in the context of this Regulation.
Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the advisory procedure referred to in Article 276(2).
For the purposes of the measures to be taken under this paragraph, where Regulation (EU) 2022/2560 refers to procurement procedures within the meaning of Directives 2014/23/EU, 2014/24/EU and 2014/25/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council (58), these shall be understood as procurement procedures within the meaning of this Regulation.
The authorising officer responsible shall notify the rejection from an award procedure by a letter addressed to the participant concerned, following the prohibition decision referred to in the second subparagraph, point (c).
