Article 10
Budgetary accounting for revenue and appropriations
1.   The revenue of a financial year shall be entered in the accounts for that year on the basis of the amounts collected during it. However, the own resources for the month of January of the following financial year may be made available in advance pursuant to Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 609/2014.
2.   The entries in respect of the Value Added Tax (VAT) and Gross National Income-based own resources may be adjusted in accordance with Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 609/2014.
3.   The entries in respect of the own resources referred to in Article 2(1), point (c), of Decision (EU, Euratom) 2020/2053 may be adjusted in accordance with Regulation (EU, Euratom) 2021/770.
4.   Commitments shall be entered in the accounts for a financial year on the basis of the legal commitments entered into and of the provisioning of financial liabilities referred to in Article 214 made up to 31 December of that year. However, the global budgetary commitments referred to in Article 112(4) shall be entered in the accounts for a financial year on the basis of the budgetary commitments up to 31 December of that year.
5.   Payments shall be entered in the accounts for a financial year on the basis of the payments made by the accounting officer by 31 December of that year.
6.   By way of derogation from paragraphs 4 and 5:
(a)
the expenditure of the European Agricultural Guarantee Fund (EAGF) shall be entered in the accounts for a financial year on the basis of the repayments made by the Commission to Member States by 31 December of that year, provided that the payment order has reached the accounting officer by 31 January of the following financial year;
(b)
expenditure implemented under shared management with the exception of the EAGF shall be entered in the accounts for a financial year on the basis of the reimbursements made by the Commission to Member States by 31 December of that year, including the expenditure charged by 31 January of the following financial year as laid down in Articles 30 and 31.
