Article 272
Specific provisions regarding building projects
1.   Each Union institution shall provide the European Parliament and the Council, by 1 June each year, with a working document on its building policy, which shall incorporate the following information:
(a)
for each building, the expenditure and surface area covered by the appropriations of the corresponding budget lines. The expenditure shall include the costs of the fitting-out of buildings but not the other charges;
(b)
the expected evolution of the global programming of surface area, taking account of trends in teleworking, and locations for the coming years with a description of the building projects in planning phase which are already identified and an assessment of the evolution of the real estate market surrounding the location of the project that leads to additional cost;
(c)
the final terms and costs, as well as relevant information regarding project implementation of new building projects previously submitted to the European Parliament and to the Council under the procedure set out in paragraphs 2 and 3 and not included in the preceding year’s working documents.
The Commission shall provide this information as part of the working documents attached to the draft budget, as set out in Article 41(3).
2.   For any building project likely to have significant financial implications for the budget, the Union institution concerned shall inform the European Parliament and the Council as early as possible, and in any case before any prospecting of the local market takes place, in the case of building contracts, or before invitations to tender are issued, in the case of building works, about the building surface area required, and the reasons for which it is required, and the provisional planning.
3.   For any building project likely to have significant financial implications for the budget, the Union institution concerned shall present the building project, in particular its detailed estimated costs, specifying in particular those relating to any works required to improve energy efficiency, and its financing including any possible use of internal assigned revenue referred to in Article 21(3), point (e), as well as a list of draft contracts intended to be used, to the European Parliament and to the Council and shall request their approval before contracts are concluded. At the request of the Union institution concerned, documents submitted relating to the building project shall be treated confidentially.
Except in cases of force majeure as referred to in paragraph 4, the European Parliament and the Council shall deliberate upon the building project within four weeks of its receipt by both institutions.
The building project shall be deemed approved at the expiry of this four-week period, unless the European Parliament or the Council take a decision contrary to the proposal within that period of time.
If the European Parliament and/or the Council raise concerns within that four-week period, that period shall be extended once by two weeks.
If the European Parliament or the Council take a decision contrary to the building project, the Union institution concerned shall withdraw its proposal and may submit a new one.
4.   In cases of force majeure, for which due reasons shall be given, the information provided for in paragraph 2 may be submitted jointly with the building project. The European Parliament and the Council shall deliberate upon the building project within two weeks of its receipt by both institutions. The building project shall be deemed to be approved at the expiry of this two-week period, unless the European Parliament and/or the Council take a decision contrary to the proposal within this period of time.
5.   The following shall be considered as building projects likely to have significant financial implications for the budget:
(a)
any acquisition of land;
(b)
the acquisition, sale, structural renovation, construction of buildings or any project combining those elements to be implemented in the same timeframe, exceeding EUR 3 000 000;
(c)
the acquisition, structural renovation, construction of buildings or any project combining those elements to be implemented in the same timeframe, exceeding EUR 2 000 000 in the event that the price represents more than 110 % of the local price of comparable properties as evaluated by an independent expert;
(d)
the sale of land or buildings in the event that the price represents less than 90 % of the local price of comparable properties as evaluated by an independent expert;
(e)
any new building contract, including usufructs, long-term leases and renewals of existing building contracts under less favourable conditions, not covered by point (b) with an annual charge of at least EUR 750 000;
(f)
the extension or renewal of existing building contracts, including usufruct and long-term leases, under the same or more favourable conditions, with an annual charge of at least EUR 3 000 000.
This paragraph shall also apply to building projects which have an interinstitutional nature, as well as to Union delegations.
The thresholds referred to in the first subparagraph, points (b) to (f), shall include the costs of fitting-out of the building. For rental and usufruct contracts, those thresholds shall take into account the costs of the fitting-out of the building but not the other charges.
6.   Without prejudice to Article 17, and in duly justified cases, a building acquisition or structural renovation project may be financed through a loan, subject to prior approval by the European Parliament and by the Council.
Loans shall be contracted and repaid in accordance with the principle of sound financial management and with due regard to the financial interests of the Union.
When the Union institution proposes to finance the acquisition or the structural renovation through a loan, the financing plan to be submitted, together with the request for prior approval by the Union institution concerned, shall specify in particular, the maximum level of financing, the financing period, the type of financing, the financing conditions and savings compared to other types of contractual arrangements. Documents submitted relating to structural renovation projects shall contain elements showing estimated savings related to the energy consumption, operating costs or improved environmental performance.
The European Parliament and the Council shall deliberate upon the request for prior approval within four weeks, extendable once by two weeks, of its receipt by both institutions. The acquisition or structural renovation financed through a loan shall be deemed to be rejected if the European Parliament and the Council do not expressly approve it within the deadline.
