Article 197
Content and publication of calls for proposals
1.   Calls for proposals shall specify:
(a)
the objectives pursued;
(b)
the eligibility, exclusion, selection and award criteria and the relevant supporting documents;
(c)
the arrangements for Union financing, specifying all types of Union contributions, in particular the forms of grant;
(d)
the arrangements and final date for the submission of proposals;
(e)
the planned date by which all applicants are to be informed of the outcome of the evaluation of their application and the indicative date for the signature of grant agreements.
2.   The dates referred to in paragraph 1, point (e), shall be fixed on the basis of the following periods:
(a)
for informing all applicants of the outcome of the evaluation of their application, a maximum of six months from the final date for submission of complete proposals;
(b)
for signing grant agreements with applicants, a maximum of three months from the date of informing applicants that they have been successful.
Those periods may be adjusted in order to take into account any time needed to comply with specific procedures that may be required by the basic act in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 and may be exceeded in exceptional, duly justified cases, in particular for complex actions, where there is a large number of proposals or delays attributable to the applicants.
The authorising officer by delegation shall report in his or her annual activity report on the average time taken to inform applicants and to sign grant agreements. In the event of the periods referred to in the first subparagraph being exceeded, the authorising officer by delegation shall give reasons and, where not duly justified in accordance with the second subparagraph, shall propose remedial action.
3.   Calls for proposals shall be published on the website of Union institutions and by any other appropriate means, including the Official Journal of the European Union, where it is necessary to provide additional publicity among potential beneficiaries. Calls for proposals may be published subject to the adoption of the financing decision referred to in Article 110, including during the year preceding budget implementation. Any modification of the content of the calls for proposals shall be published under the same conditions.
