Article 216
Effective provisioning rate
1.   The provisioning of budgetary guarantees and financial assistance to third countries in the common provisioning fund shall be based on an effective provisioning rate. That rate shall provide a level of protection against the financial liabilities of the Union equivalent to the level that would be provided by the respective provisioning rates if the resources where held and managed separately.
2.   The effective provisioning rate applicable shall be a percentage of each initial provisioning rate determined in accordance with Article 214(2), second subparagraph. It shall apply only to the amount of resources in the common provisioning fund foreseen for the payment of guarantee calls over a one year period. It shall provide for a ratio, in the form of a percentage, between the amount of cash and cash equivalents in the common provisioning fund required to honour guarantee calls and the total amount of cash and cash equivalents that would be required in each guarantee fund to honour guarantee calls, if the resources were held and managed separately, where both amounts represent an equivalent liquidity risk. That ratio shall not fall below 95 %. The calculation of the effective provisioning rate shall take into account:
(a)
the forecast of inflows and outflows in the common provisioning fund, having regard to the initial phase of constitution of global provisioning in accordance with Article 214(2), second subparagraph;
(b)
the risk correlation among the budgetary guarantees and the financial assistance to third countries;
(c)
the market conditions.
The Commission shall by 1 July 2020 adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 275 to supplement this Regulation with detailed conditions for the calculation of the effective provisioning rate, including a methodology for that calculation.
The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 275 to amend the minimum ratio referred to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph in the light of the experience gained with the operation of the common provisioning fund while maintaining a prudent approach in line with the principle of sound financial management. The minimum ratio shall not be set at a level lower than 85 %.
3.   The effective provisioning rate shall be calculated annually by the financial manager of the resources of the common provisioning fund and shall be the reference for the Commission’s calculation of the contributions from the budget pursuant to Article 214(4), point (a), and, subsequently, paragraph 4, point (b), of this Article.
4.   Following the calculation of the annual effective provisioning rate in accordance with paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article, the following operations in the context of the budgetary procedure shall be made and presented in the working document referred to in Article 41(5), point (h):
(a)
any surplus of provisions for a budgetary guarantee or a financial assistance to a third country shall be returned to the budget;
(b)
any replenishment of the fund shall be carried out in annual tranches during a maximum period of three years, without prejudice to Article 214(6).
5.   After having consulted the accounting officer, the Commission shall establish the guidelines applicable to the management of the resources in the common provisioning fund in accordance with appropriate prudential rules and excluding derivative operations for speculative purposes. Those guidelines shall be attached to the agreement with the financial manager of the resources of the common provisioning fund.
An independent evaluation of the adequacy of the guidelines shall be carried out every three years and transmitted to the European Parliament and to the Council.
