Article 31
Transfer proposals submitted to the European Parliament and to the Council by Union institutions
1.   Each Union institution shall submit its transfer proposals simultaneously to the European Parliament and to the Council.
2.   The Commission may submit proposals for transfers of payment appropriations to the funds implemented under shared management with the exception of the EAGF to the European Parliament and to the Council by 10 January of the following financial year. The transfer of the payment appropriations may be made from any budgetary item. In such cases, the six-week period referred to in paragraph 4 shall be reduced to three weeks.
If the transfer is not approved or only partially approved by the European Parliament and by the Council, the corresponding part of the expenditure referred to in Article 10(7), point (b), shall be charged to the payment appropriations of the following financial year.
3.   The European Parliament and the Council shall take decisions on transfers of appropriations in accordance with paragraphs 4 to 8.
4.   Except in urgent circumstances, the European Parliament and the Council, the latter acting by qualified majority, shall deliberate upon each transfer proposal within six weeks of its receipt by both institutions. In urgent circumstances, the European Parliament and the Council shall deliberate within three weeks of receipt of the proposal.
5.   Where the Commission intends to transfer EAGF appropriations in accordance with this Article, it shall submit transfer proposals to the European Parliament and to the Council by 10 January of the following financial year. In such cases, the six-week period referred to in paragraph 4 shall be reduced to three weeks.
6.   A transfer proposal shall be approved or considered to be approved, if, within the six-week period, any of the following occurs:
(a)
the European Parliament and the Council approve it;
(b)
either the European Parliament or the Council approves it and the other institution refrains from acting;
(c)
neither the European Parliament nor the Council takes a decision to amend or refuse the transfer proposal.
7.   Unless either the European Parliament or the Council requests otherwise, the six-week period referred to in paragraph 4 shall be reduced to three weeks in the following cases:
(a)
the transfer represents less than 10 % of the appropriations of the budget line from which the transfer is made and does not exceed EUR 5 000 000;
(b)
the transfer concerns only payment appropriations and the overall amount of the transfer does not exceed EUR 100 000 000.
8.   If either the European Parliament or the Council has amended the amount of the transfer while the other institution has approved it or refrains from acting, or if the European Parliament and the Council have both amended the amount of the transfer, the lesser of the two amounts shall be deemed approved, unless the Union institution concerned withdraws its transfer proposal.
