Article 63
National SoHO emergency plans
1.   Member States, in collaboration with SoHO national authorities, shall draw up national SoHO emergency plans setting out measures to be applied without undue delay when the demand or the supply situation for critical SoHO presents, or is likely to present, a serious risk to human health.
2.   In developing national SoHO emergency plans, Member States shall ensure cooperation and consultation, as appropriate, with their health surveillance bodies, military medical services, civil protection services and other services routinely involved in emergency responses. Member States shall implement national SoHO emergency plans in coordination with other response actions at national or Union level, if adopted, and, where relevant, in a manner consistent with the national prevention, preparedness and response plans developed in accordance with Article 6 of Regulation (EU) 2022/2371 and with Directive (EU) 2022/2557 of the European Parliament and of the Council (20).
3.   Member States shall draw up the plans referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article, setting out the following elements:
(a)
potential risks to the supply of critical SoHO;
(b)
the designation of critical SoHO entities and any other relevant third party to be involved in the supply of critical SoHO;
(c)
a consolidated national overview of critical SoHO entity emergency plans referred to in Article 67;
(d)
the powers and responsibilities of SoHO competent authorities in situations of emergency as referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article;
(e)
procedures for sharing information, where appropriate, via the EU SoHO Platform, as well as elements of information to be exchanged with the SoHO national authorities of the other Member States and with other parties concerned, as appropriate, including in cases of shortages of critical SoHO with cross-border impact;
(f)
preparedness and response measures for specific identified risks, in particular those concerning communicable disease outbreaks, war or terrorist attacks and environmental disasters;
(g)
a procedure for the assessment and authorisation, in the context of a health emergency situation and in accordance with Article 65, of requests from SoHO entities for derogations from the obligation to have a SoHO preparation authorisation pursuant to Article 38(1);
(h)
a mechanism to ensure that in a health emergency situation, critical SoHO are prioritised according to specific medical needs.
4.   Member States shall take into account the guidance of the ECDC, for emergencies related to epidemiological outbreaks, and the guidelines published by the EDQM, for emergency planning in general.
5.   Member States shall involve relevant stakeholders in the elaboration of their national SoHO emergency plans, in particular by cooperating with their critical SoHO entities, as well as with the EDQM and the ECDC. Member States shall review at least every 4 years such plans in order to take into account changes in the designation of critical SoHO entities, the organisation of SoHO competent authorities and the experience gained from implementing the plans and simulation exercises.
6.   Member States shall present a summary of their national SoHO emergency plans, and major reviews of those plans, within the SCB.
7.   The SCB, in cooperation with the Commission, shall support a coordinated approach to ensure the implementation of the national SoHO emergency plans in cases where an emergency affects more than one Member States or in the case of emergencies with an effect beyond the Union, to communicate and collaborate with relevant international organisations and authorities.
