Article 61
Exceptional release
1.   The physician referred to in Article 50 may authorise a releasing officer in a SoHO establishment referred to in Article 49, to release a certain SoHO preparation for distribution and for human application to an intended SoHO recipient even in cases where that SoHO preparation does not meet all of the relevant standards referred to in Articles 58 and 59, or does not fully comply with its SoHO preparation authorisation, or has been imported under the derogation referred to in Article 26(6), provided that the potential benefit for the SoHO recipient outweighs the risks and that no alternative is available. The exceptional release condition shall be explicitly indicated on the label or in the documentation accompanying the released SoHO preparation.
2.   Exceptional release referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article shall be authorised in the case of release for distribution, on the basis of a documented request from the physician treating the intended SoHO recipient, where such a request includes a confirmation of full knowledge of, and agreement to, any deviation from this Regulation. The physician referred to in Article 50 shall document the agreement together with a benefit-risk assessment. In such circumstances, the intended SoHO recipient, or person granting consent on their behalf, shall be informed of the exceptional release and shall be required to give consent in accordance with national legislation prior to the human application of SoHO.
The SoHO establishment which releases the SoHO preparation for distribution, in coordination with the SoHO entity which applies that SoHO preparation, where applicable, shall establish a plan for monitoring the SoHO recipient’s health after human application. The plan shall provide for monitoring the risks associated with the exceptional SoHO release. The SoHO establishment, in coordination with that SoHO entity, shall set out a time period during which the monitoring shall continue.
3.   Exceptional release, as referred to in paragraph 1, may also be authorised in the case of release for export, on the basis of a documented request from a treating physician, or from a regulatory authority, in a third country, where such a request includes a confirmation of full knowledge of, and agreement to, any deviation from this Regulation.
4.   Exceptional release, as referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article, may also be authorised in the case of certain SoHO to be used for the manufacture of a product regulated by other Union legislation and intended for a specific recipient, in cases where the SoHO preparation does not meet all of the relevant standards and guidelines referred to in Article 58 or 59 and on the basis of a documented request from the manufacturer, where such a request includes a confirmation of full knowledge of, and agreement to, any deviation from this Regulation.
CHAPTER VIII

SUPPLY CONTINUITY

