Article 54
Standards concerning voluntary and unpaid nature of SoHO donations
1.   SoHO entities shall not provide financial incentives or inducements to SoHO donors or any persons granting consent on their behalf.
2.   Where Member States allow for the compensation of living SoHO donors, in accordance with the principle of voluntary and unpaid donation and based on transparent criteria, including through fixed allowances, or through non-financial forms of compensation, the conditions for such compensation shall be established in national legislation, including by setting an upper limit for compensation that shall endeavour to guarantee financial neutrality, consistent with the standards laid down in this Article. Member States may delegate the setting of conditions for such compensation to independent bodies that are established in accordance with national legislation. The setting of conditions for such compensation shall be based on criteria that take into account the practices documented by the SCB, as referred to in Article 69(1), point (g). SoHO donors may choose not to be compensated.
3.   When Member States allow for the compensation of SoHO donors as referred to in paragraph 2, the conditions for such compensation applied by each Member State shall be made available to the SCB for sharing with the SoHO national authorities of the other Member States via the EU SoHO Platform and the information shall be updated without undue delay if it has been modified.
4.   Member States shall ensure that any promotion and publicity activities in support of the donation of SoHO do not refer to compensation, without prejudice to the right of SoHO donors to be informed of their rights, in accordance with national law.
5.   SoHO entities may compensate living SoHO donors as provided for by their Member States pursuant to paragraph 2. At the request of their SoHO competent authority, SoHO entities shall provide information in a transparent manner on the details of how they have implemented the conditions laid down in national legislation.
6.   Member States shall ensure compliance with standards concerning voluntary and unpaid donation, equivalent to those laid down in this Article, also when SoHO are donated exclusively for use in research without any human application.
