Article 59
Implementation of the standards concerning protection of SoHO recipients and offspring from medically assisted reproduction
1.   When the Commission deems it necessary to establish binding rules on the implementation of a particular standard, or elements thereof, referred to in Article 58, in order to ensure convergent and high levels of protection of SoHO recipients and offspring from medically assisted reproduction, the Commission may adopt implementing acts setting out particular procedures to be applied to meet such standard or element thereof.
Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 79(2).
2.   On duly justified imperative grounds of urgency relating to a risk to the health of the SoHO recipient or of the offspring from medically assisted reproduction, the Commission shall adopt immediately applicable implementing acts in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 79(3).
3.   The implementing acts adopted in accordance with paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article shall also apply to SoHO entities when they apply the standards, or elements thereof, concerning protection of SoHO recipients and offspring from medically assisted reproduction as referred to in Article 58.
4.   For those standards, or elements thereof, concerning protection of SoHO recipients and offspring from medically assisted reproduction for which no implementing act has been adopted, SoHO entities shall take into account:
(a)
the most recent technical guidelines, as indicated on the EU SoHO Platform, as follows:
(i)
published by the ECDC concerning the prevention of communicable disease transmission;
(ii)
published by the EDQM concerning protection of SoHO recipients and offspring from medically assisted reproduction other than from transmission of communicable disease;
(b)
other guidelines, adopted by Member States, as referred to in Article 27(6), point (b);
(c)
other guidelines or technical methods, applied in specific circumstances, as referred to in Article 27(6), point (c).
5.   In the cases referred to in paragraph 4, point (a), of this Article, for the purposes of Article 28 in conjunction with Article 27, SoHO entities shall demonstrate to their SoHO competent authorities, for each of the standards or elements thereof, which and to what extent they follow the technical guidelines referred to in paragraph 4, point (a), of this Article.
6.   In the cases referred to in paragraph 4, point (b), of this Article, for the purposes of Article 28 in conjunction with Article 27, SoHO entities shall demonstrate to their SoHO competent authorities, for each of the standards or elements thereof, which and to what extent they follow the technical guidelines referred to in paragraph 4, point (b), of this Article.
7.   In the cases referred to in paragraph 4, point (c), of this Article, for the purposes of Article 28 in conjunction with Article 27, SoHO entities shall provide during inspection a justification to their SoHO competent authorities, for each specific standard, or element thereof, that the other guidelines are adequate to achieve the level of quality and safety set out in that standard. That justification may be based on a documented demonstration of equivalence with the technical guidelines published by the ECDC and by the EDQM referred to in paragraph 4, point (a), of this Article.
Where other technical methods are applied, SoHO entities shall perform a risk assessment to demonstrate that the technical methods applied achieve a high level of protection of SoHO donors, and record the practice followed to establish the technical methods. They shall make the assessment and record available for review by their SoHO competent authorities during inspection or on specific request of the SoHO competent authorities.
