Article 12
Content
Each operational programme under the European territorial cooperation objective shall contain the following information:
1.
an analysis of the situation of the cooperation area in terms of strengths and weaknesses and the strategy chosen in response;
2.
a list of the eligible areas within the programme area including, as regards programmes for cross-border cooperation, the flexibility areas as referred to in Article 21(1);
3.
a justification of the priorities chosen having regard to the Community strategic guidelines on cohesion, the national strategic reference framework where the Member State has chosen to include actions financed under the European territorial cooperation objective within it, and the results of the ex ante evaluation referred to in Article 48(2) of Regulation (EC) No 1083/2006;
4.
information on the priority axes and their specific targets. Those targets shall be quantified using a limited number of indicators for output and results, taking into account the principle of proportionality. The indicators shall make it possible to measure the progress in relation to the baseline situation and the achievement of the targets of the priority axis;
5.
for information purposes only, an indicative breakdown by category of the programmed use of the contribution from the ERDF to the operational programme in accordance with the implementing rules adopted by the Commission in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 103(3) of Regulation (EC) No 1083/2006;
6.
a single financing plan, with no breakdown by Member State, comprising two tables:
(a)
a table breaking down for each year, in accordance with Articles 52, 53 and 54 of Regulation (EC) No 1083/2006, the amount of the total financial appropriation envisaged for the contribution from the ERDF. The total ERDF contribution provided for annually shall be compatible with the applicable financial framework;
(b)
a table specifying, for the whole programming period, for the operational programme and for each priority axis, the amount of the total financial appropriation of the Community contribution and the national counterparts, and the rate of the ERDF contribution. Where, in accordance with Article 53 of Regulation (EC) No 1083/2006, the national counterpart is made up of public and private expenditure, the table shall give the indicative breakdown between the public and the private component. Where, in accordance with that Article, the national counterpart is made up of public expenditure, the table shall indicate the amount of the national public contribution;
7.
information on complementarity with measures financed by the EAFRD and those financed by the EFF, where relevant;
8.
the implementing provisions for the operational programme, including:
(a)
designation by the Member States of all the authorities referred to in Article 14;
(b)
a description of the monitoring and evaluation systems;
(c)
information about the competent body for receiving the payments made by the Commission and the body or bodies responsible for making payments to the beneficiaries;
(d)
a definition of the procedures for the mobilisation and circulation of financial flows in order to ensure their transparency;
(e)
the elements aimed at ensuring the publicity and the information of the operational programme as referred to in Article 69 of Regulation (EC) No 1083/2006;
(f)
a description of the procedures agreed between the Commission and Member States for the exchange of computerised data to meet the payment, monitoring and evaluation requirements laid down by Regulation (EC) No 1083/2006;
9.
an indicative list of major projects within the meaning of Article 39 of Regulation (EC) No 1083/2006 expected to be submitted during the programming period for Commission approval.
