Article 21
Mixed procurement contracts involving defence or security aspects
1.   In the case of mixed contracts which have as their subject-matter elements of a concession covered by this Directive and procurement or other elements covered by Article 346 TFEU or Directive 2009/81/EC this Article shall apply.
In the case of contracts intended to cover several activities, one of them being subject either to Annex II of this Directive or to Directive 2014/25/EU, and another being covered by Article 346 TFEU or Directive 2009/81/EC, the applicable provisions shall be established in accordance with, Article 23 of this Directive and Article 26 of 2014/25/EU, respectively.
2.   Where the different parts of a given contract are objectively separable, contracting authorities or contracting entities may choose to award separate contracts for the separate parts or to award a single contract.
Where contracting authorities or contracting entities choose to award separate contracts for separate parts, the decision of the legal regime applicable to any one of such separate contracts shall be taken on the basis of the characteristics of the separate part concerned.
Where contracting authorities or contracting entities choose to award a single contract, the following criteria shall apply to determine the applicable legal regime:
(a)
where part of a given contract is covered by Article 346 TFEU, or different parts are covered by Article 346 TFEU and Directive 2009/81/EC respectively, the contract may be awarded without applying this Directive, provided that the award of a single contract is justified for objective reasons;
(b)
where part of a given contract is covered by Directive 2009/81/EC, the contract may be awarded in accordance with this Directive or in accordance with Directive 2009/81/EC, provided that the award of a single contract is justified for objective reasons.
The decision to award a single contract shall not, however, be taken for the purpose of excluding contracts from the application of either this Directive or Directive 2009/81/EC.
3.   Where the different parts of a given contract are objectively not separable, the contract may be awarded without applying this Directive where it includes elements to which Article 346 TFEU applies. Otherwise the contracting authority or contracting entity may choose to award a contract in accordance with this Directive or in accordance with this Directive or in accordance with Directive 2009/81/EC.
