Article 22
Contracts covering both activities referred to in Annex II and other activities
1.   By way of derogation from Article 20, in the case of contracts intended to cover several activities, contracting entities may choose to award separate contracts for the purposes of each separate activity or to award a single contract. Where contracting entities choose to award a separate contract, the decision of which rules apply to any one of such separate contracts shall be taken on the basis of the characteristics of the separate activity concerned.
Notwithstanding Article 20, where contracting entities choose to award a single contract, paragraphs 2 and 3 of this Article shall apply. However, where one of the activities concerned is covered by Article 346 TFEU or Directive 2009/81/EC, Article 23 of this Directive shall apply.
The choice between awarding a single contract or awarding a number of separate contracts shall not be made with the objective of excluding the contract or contracts from the scope of this Directive or, where applicable, from the scope of Directive 2014/24/EU or 2014/25/EU.
2.   A contract which is intended to cover several activities shall be subject to the rules applicable to the activity for which it is principally intended.
3.   In the case of contracts for which it is objectively impossible to determine for which activity the contract is principally intended, the applicable rules shall be determined in accordance with the following:
(a)
the concession shall be awarded in accordance with the provisions of this Directive applicable to concessions awarded by contracting authorities, if one of the activities for which the contract is intended is subject to the provisions of this Directive applicable to concessions awarded by contracting authorities and the other is subject to the provisions of this Directive applicable to concessions awarded by contracting entities;
(b)
the contract shall be awarded in accordance with Directive 2014/24/EU, if one of the activities for which the contract is intended is subject to this Directive and the other to Directive 2014/24/EU;
(c)
the contract shall be awarded in accordance with this Directive, if one of the activities for which the contract is intended is subject to this Directive and the other is not subject to either this Directive, Directive 2014/24/EU or Directive 2014/25/EU.
