Article 33
Form and manner of publication of notices
1.   Concession notices, concession award notices and the notice referred to in the second subparagraph of Article 43(1) shall include the information set out in Annexes V, VII and VIII and in the format of standard forms, including standard forms for corrigenda.
The Commission shall establish those standard forms by means of implementing acts. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the advisory procedure referred to in Article 50.
2.   The notices referred to in paragraph 1 shall be drawn up, transmitted by electronic means to the Publications Office of the European Union and published in accordance with Annex IX. The Publications Office of the European Union shall give the contracting authority or contracting entity confirmation of the receipt of the notice and of the publication of the information sent, indicating the date of publication which shall constitute proof of publication. Notices shall be published not later than five days after they are sent. The costs of publication of the notices by the Publications Office of the European Union shall be borne by the Union.
3.   Concession notices shall be published in full in one or more of the official languages of the institutions of the Union as chosen by the contracting authority or contracting entity. That language version or those language versions shall constitute the sole authentic text or texts. A summary of the important elements of each notice shall be published in the other official languages of the institutions of the Union.
4.   Concession notices and concession award notices shall not be published at national level before publication by the Publications Office of the European Union unless publication at Union level does not take place 48 hours after the Publications Office of the European Union confirms receipt by the contracting authority or the contracting entity of the notice as referred to in paragraph 2. Concession notices and concession award notices published at national level shall not contain information other than that contained in the notices dispatched to the Publications Office of the European Union but shall indicate the date of dispatch of the notice to the Publications Office of the European Union.
