Article 10
Exclusions applicable to concessions awarded by contracting authorities and contracting entities
1.   This Directive shall not apply to services concessions awarded to a contracting authority or to a contracting entity as referred to in point (a) of Article 7(1) or to an association thereof on the basis of an exclusive right.
This Directive shall not apply to services concessions awarded to an economic operator on the basis of an exclusive right which has been granted in accordance with the TFEU and Union legal acts laying down common rules on access to the market applicable to activities referred to in Annex II.
2.   By way of derogation from the second subparagraph of paragraph 1 of this Article, where Union sectoral legislation referred to in that subparagraph does not provide for sector-specific transparency obligations, Article 32 shall apply.
Where a Member State grants an exclusive right to an economic operator for the exercise of one of the activities referred to in Annex II, it shall inform the Commission thereof within one month after the award of that exclusive right.
3.   This Directive shall not apply to concessions for air transport services based on the granting of an operating licence within the meaning of Regulation (EC) No 1008/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council (22) or to concessions for public passenger transport services within the meaning of Regulation (EC) No 1370/2007.
4.   This Directive shall not apply to concessions which the contracting authority or contracting entity is obliged to award or organise in accordance with procedures different from those laid down in this Directive established by any of the following:
(a)
a legal instrument creating international law obligations, such as an international agreement concluded in conformity with the TFEU between a Member State and one or more third countries or subdivisions thereof and covering works, supplies or services intended for the joint implementation or exploitation of a project by their signatories;
(b)
an international organisation.
This Directive shall not apply to concessions which the contracting authority or contracting entity awards in accordance with procurement rules provided by an international organisation or international financing institution, where the concessions concerned are fully financed by that organisation or institution. In the case of concessions co-financed for the most part by an international organisation or international financing institution, the parties shall agree on applicable procurement procedures.
The Member States shall communicate all legal instruments referred to in point (a) of the first subparagraph of this paragraph to the Commission, which may consult the Advisory Committee on Public Procurement referred to in Article 50.
This paragraph shall not apply to concessions in the fields of defence and security as referred to in Directive 2009/81/EC.
5.   This Directive shall not apply to concessions in the fields of defence and security as referred to in Directive 2009/81/EC, which are governed by:
(a)
specific procedural rules pursuant to an international agreement or arrangement concluded between one or more Member States and one or more third countries;
(b)
specific procedural rules pursuant to a concluded international agreement or arrangement relating to the stationing of troops and concerning the undertakings of a Member State or a third country;
(c)
specific procedural rules of an international organisation purchasing for its purposes, or to concessions which must be awarded by a Member State in accordance with those rules.
6.   This Directive shall apply to the awarding of concessions in the fields of defence and security as referred to in Directive 2009/81/EC with the exception of the following:
(a)
concessions for which the application of this Directive would oblige a Member State to supply information the disclosure of which it considers contrary to the essential interests of its security; or where the procurement and performance of the concession are declared to be secret or must be accompanied by special security measures in accordance with the laws, regulations or administrative provisions in force in a Member State provided that the Member State has determined that the essential interests concerned cannot be guaranteed by less intrusive measures, such as those referred to in paragraph 7;
(b)
concessions awarded in the framework of a cooperative programme referred to in point (c) of Article 13 of Directive 2009/81/EC;
(c)
concessions awarded by a government to another government relating to works and services directly linked to military equipment or sensitive equipment, or works and services specifically for military purposes, or sensitive works and sensitive services;
(d)
concessions awarded in a third country, carried out when forces are deployed outside the territory of the Union where operational needs require those concessions to be concluded with economic operators located in the area of operations; and
(e)
concessions otherwise exempted under this Directive.
7.   This Directive shall not apply to concessions not otherwise exempted under paragraph 6 to the extent that the protection of the essential security interests of a Member State cannot be guaranteed by less intrusive measures, for instance by imposing requirements aimed at protecting the confidential nature of information which the contracting authority or contracting entity makes available in a concession award procedure as provided for in this Directive.
8.   This Directive shall not apply to service concessions for:
(a)
the acquisition or rental, by whatever financial means, of land, existing buildings or other immovable property or concerning rights thereon;
(b)
the acquisition, development, production or co-production of programme material intended for audiovisual media services or radio media services, that are awarded by audiovisual or radio media service providers, or concessions for broadcasting time or programme provision, that are awarded to audiovisual or radio media service providers. For the purposes of this point, ‘audiovisual media services’ and ‘media service providers’ shall, respectively, have the same meaning as in points (a) and (d) of Article 1(1) of Directive 2010/13/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council (23). ‘Programme’ shall have the same meaning as in point (b) Article 1(1) of that Directive, but shall also include radio programmes and radio programme materials. Furthermore, for the purposes of this provision, ‘programme material’ shall have the same meaning as ‘programme’;
(c)
arbitration and conciliation services;
(d)
any of the following legal services:
(i)
legal representation of a client by a lawyer within the meaning of Article 1 of Council Directive 77/249/EEC (24) in:
—
an arbitration or conciliation held in a Member State, a third country or before an international arbitration or conciliation instance, or
—
judicial proceedings before the courts, tribunals or public authorities of a Member State or a third country or before international courts, tribunals or institutions;
(ii)
legal advice given in preparation of any of the proceedings referred to in point (i) of this point or where there is a tangible indication and high probability that the matter to which the advice relates will become the subject of such proceedings, provided that the advice is given by a lawyer within the meaning of Article 1 of Directive 77/249/EEC;
(iii)
document certification and authentication services which must be provided by notaries;
(iv)
legal services provided by trustees or appointed guardians or other legal services the providers of which are designated by a court or tribunal in the Member State concerned or are designated by law to carry out specific tasks under the supervision of such tribunals or courts;
(v)
other legal services which in the Member State concerned are connected, even occasionally, with the exercise of official authority;
(e)
financial services in connection with the issue, sale, purchase or transfer of securities or other financial instruments within the meaning of Directive 2004/39/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (25), central bank services and operations conducted with the European Financial Stability Facility and the European Stability Mechanism;
(f)
loans, whether or not in connection with the issue, sale, purchase or transfer of securities or other financial instruments;
(g)
civil defence, civil protection, and danger prevention services that are provided by non-profit organisations or associations, and which are covered by CPV codes: 75250000-3, 75251000-0, 75251100-1, 75251110-4, 75251120-7, 75252000-7, 75222000-8, 98113100-9 and 85143000-3 except patient transport ambulance services;
(h)
political campaign services, which are covered by CPV codes 79341400-0, 92111230-3 and 92111240-6, when awarded by a political party in the context of an election campaign.
9.   This Directive shall not apply to service concessions for lottery services, which are covered by CPV code 92351100-7, awarded by a Member State to an economic operator on the basis of an exclusive right. For the purpose of this paragraph, the notion of exclusive right does not cover exclusive rights as referred to in Article 7(2).
The grant of such an exclusive right shall be subject to publication in the Official Journal of the European Union.
10.   This Directive shall not apply to concessions awarded by contracting entities for the pursuit of their activities in a third country, in conditions not involving the physical use of a network or geographical area within the Union.
