Article 9
Revision of the threshold
1.   Every two years from 30 June 2013, the Commission shall verify that the threshold set out in Article 8(1) corresponds to the threshold established in the World Trade Organisation Agreement on Government Procurement (the ‘GPA’) for works concessions and shall, where necessary, revise that threshold in accordance with this Article.
In accordance with the calculation method set out in the GPA, the Commission shall calculate the value of the threshold on the basis of the average daily value of the euro in terms of the special drawing rights (SDRs), over a period of 24 months terminating on 31 August preceding the revision with effect from 1 January. The value of the threshold thus revised shall, where necessary, be rounded down to the nearest thousand euros so as to ensure that the threshold in force provided for by the GPA, expressed in SDRs, is observed.
2.   Every two years from 1 January 2014, the Commission shall determine the values, in the national currencies of the Member States whose currency is not the euro, of the threshold referred to in Article 8(1), revised pursuant to paragraph 1 of this Article.
In accordance with the calculation method set out in the GPA, the determination of such values shall be based on the average daily values of those currencies corresponding to the applicable threshold expressed in euro over the 24 months terminating on 31 August preceding the revision with effect from 1 January.
3.   The Commission shall publish the revised threshold referred to in paragraph 1, its corresponding value in the national currencies referred to in the first subparagraph of paragraph 2, and the value determined in accordance with the second subparagraph of paragraph 2, in the Official Journal of the European Union at the beginning of the month of November following their revision.
4.   The Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 48 to adapt the methodology set out in the second subparagraph of paragraph 1 of this Article to any change in the methodology provided in the GPA for the revision of the threshold referred to in Article 8(1) and for the determination of the corresponding values in the national currencies of the Member States whose currency is not the euro, as referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article.
The Commission shall also be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 48 to revise the threshold referred to in Article 8(1) pursuant to paragraph 1 of this Article.
5.   Where it is necessary to revise that threshold and time constraints prevent use of the procedure set out in Article 48 and therefore imperative grounds of urgency so require, the procedure provided for in Article 49 shall apply to delegated acts adopted pursuant to the second subparagraph of paragraph 4 of this Article.

Section II



Exclusions


