Article 29
Report to ensure the better functioning of the carbon market
If, on the basis of the regular reports on the carbon market referred to in Article 10(5), the Commission has evidence that the carbon market is not functioning properly, it shall submit a report to the European Parliament and to the Council. The report may be accompanied, if appropriate, by proposals aiming at increasing transparency of the carbon market and addressing measures to improve its functioning.’;
29.
The following Article shall be inserted:
‘Article 29a
Measures in the event of excessive price fluctuations
1.   If, for more than six consecutive months, the allowance price is more than three times the average price of allowances during the two preceding years on the European carbon market, the Commission shall immediately convene a meeting of the Committee established by Article 9 of Decision No 280/2004/EC.
2.   If the price evolution referred to in paragraph 1 does not correspond to changing market fundamentals, one of the following measures may be adopted, taking into account the degree of price evolution:
(a)
a measure which allows Member States to bring forward the auctioning of a part of the quantity to be auctioned;
(b)
a measure which allows Member States to auction up to 25 % of the remaining allowances in the new entrants reserve.
Those measures shall be adopted in accordance with the management procedure referred to in Article 23(4).
3.   Any measure shall take utmost account of the reports submitted by the Commission to the European Parliament and to the Council pursuant to Article 29, as well as any other relevant information provided by Member States.
4.   The arrangements for the application of these provisions shall be laid down in the regulation referred to in Article 10(4).’;
30.
Annex I shall be replaced by the text appearing in Annex I to this Directive;
31.
Annexes IIa and IIb shall be inserted as set out in Annex II to this Directive;
32.
Annex III shall be deleted.
