Article 36
Financing activities
1.   The Union shall finance performance of the tasks of the Network referred to in Article 31 and the peer reviews referred to in Article 12.
2.   The Union may finance the following activities in relation to the application of this Regulation:
(a)
the functioning of the Product Contact Points;
(b)
the establishment and functioning of Union testing facilities referred to in Article 21;
(c)
the development of instruments of international cooperation referred to in Article 35;
(d)
the drawing up and updating of contributions to guidelines on market surveillance;
(e)
the making available to the Commission of technical or scientific expertise for the purpose of assisting the Commission in its implementation of market surveillance administrative cooperation;
(f)
the implementation of national market surveillance strategies referred to in Article 13;
(g)
Member States' and Union market surveillance campaigns and associated activities, including resources and equipment, IT tools and training;
(h)
the performance of preliminary or ancillary work in connection with market surveillance activities related to the application of Union harmonisation legislation, such as studies, programmes, evaluations, guidelines, comparative analyses, mutual joint visits and visit programmes, exchange of personnel, research work, training activities, laboratory work, proficiency testing, inter-laboratory tests and conformity assessment work;
(i)
activities carried out under programmes providing technical assistance, cooperation with third countries and the promotion and enhancement of Union market surveillance policies and systems amongst interested parties at Union and international level.
3.   The Union shall finance the electronic interface referred to in Article 34(7), including the development of the information and communication system referred to in Article 34 to enable it to receive automatic flows of electronic data from the national customs systems.
4.   The Union shall finance the electronic interfaces referred to in Article 34(2) enabling the exchange of data between the information and communication system referred to in Article 34 and the national market surveillance systems.
5.   The Union's financial assistance with respect to the activities in support of this Regulation shall be implemented in accordance with Regulation (EU, Euratom) 2018/1046 of the European Parliament and of the Council (52), either directly, or by entrusting budget implementation tasks to the entities listed in point (c) of Article 62(1) of that Regulation.
6.   The appropriations allocated to activities referred to in this Regulation shall be determined each year by the budgetary authority within the limits of the financial framework in force.
7.   The appropriations determined by the budgetary authority for the financing of market surveillance activities may also cover expenses relating to preparatory work, monitoring, control, audit and evaluation activities which are required for the management of the activities set out in this Regulation and for the achievement of their objectives. These expenses shall include the costs of conducting studies, arranging meetings of experts, information and communication activities, including corporate communication of the political priorities of the Union in so far as they are related to the general objectives of market surveillance activities, expenses linked to information technology networks focusing on information processing and exchange together with all other related technical and administrative assistance expenses incurred by the Commission.
