Article 25
Controls on products entering the Union market
1.   Member States shall designate customs authorities, one or more market surveillance authorities or any other authority in their territory as the authorities in charge of the control on products entering the Union market.
Each Member State shall inform the Commission and the other Member States of the authorities designated under the first subparagraph and of their areas of competence through the information and communication system referred to in Article 34.
2.   The authorities designated under paragraph 1 shall have the necessary powers and resources for the proper performance of their tasks as referred to in that paragraph.
3.   Products subject to Union law that are to be placed under the customs procedure ‘release for free circulation’ shall be subject to controls performed by the authorities designated under paragraph 1 of this Article. They shall perform those controls on the basis of risk analysis in accordance with Articles 46 and 47 of Regulation (EU) No 952/2013 and, where relevant, on the basis of risk-based approach as referred to in the second subparagraph of Article 11(3) of this Regulation.
4.   Risk-related information shall be exchanged between:
(a)
the authorities designated under paragraph 1 of this Article in accordance with Article 47(2) of Regulation (EU) No 952/2013; and
(b)
customs authorities in accordance with Article 46(5) of Regulation (EU) No 952/2013.
Where, in relation to products subject to Union law that are either in temporary storage or placed under a customs procedure other than ‘release for free circulation’, customs authorities at the first point of entry have reason to believe that those products are not compliant with applicable Union law or present a risk, they shall transmit all relevant information to the competent customs office of destination.
5.   Market surveillance authorities shall provide authorities designated under paragraph 1 with information on categories of products or the identity of economic operators where a higher risk of non-compliance has been identified.
6.   By 31 March of each year, Member States shall submit to the Commission detailed statistical data covering controls performed by the authorities designated under paragraph 1 with respect to products subject to Union law during the previous calendar year. The statistical data shall cover the number of interventions in the field of controls on such products with regard to product safety and compliance.
The Commission shall draw up a report by 30 June of each year, containing the information provided by the Member States for the previous calendar year and an analysis of the data submitted. The report shall be published in the information and communication system referred to in Article 34.
7.   Where the Commission becomes aware of a serious risk presented by products subject to Union law that are imported from a third country, it shall recommend to the Member State concerned to take appropriate market surveillance measures.
8.   The Commission, after consulting the Network, may adopt implementing acts laying down benchmarks and techniques for checks on the basis of common risk analysis on the Union level, in order to ensure a consistent enforcement of Union law, to strengthen the controls on products entering the Union market and to ensure an effective and uniform level of such controls. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 43(2).
9.   The Commission shall adopt implementing acts further specifying the details of the data to be submitted under paragraph 6 of this Article. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 43(2).
