Article 28
Refusal to release for free circulation
1.   Where the market surveillance authorities conclude that a product presents a serious risk, they shall take measures to prohibit the placing of the product on the market and shall require the authorities designated under Article 25(1) not to release it for free circulation. They shall also require these authorities to include the following notice in the customs data-processing system, and, where appropriate, on the commercial invoice accompanying the product and on any other relevant accompanying document:

                        ‘Dangerous product — release for free circulation not authorised — Regulation (EU) 2019/1020’.
Market surveillance authorities shall immediately enter that information in the information and communication system referred to in Article 34.
2.   Where market surveillance authorities conclude that a product may not be placed on the market since it does not comply with the Union law applicable to it, they shall take measures to prohibit the placing of the product on the market and shall require the authorities designated under Article 25(1) not to release it for free circulation. They shall also require those authorities to include the following notice in the customs data-processing system, and, where appropriate, on the commercial invoice accompanying the product and on any other relevant accompanying document:

                        ‘Product not in conformity — release for free circulation not authorised — Regulation (EU) 2019/1020’.
Market surveillance authorities shall immediately enter that information in the information and communication system referred to in Article 34.
3.   Where the product referred to in paragraph 1 or 2 is subsequently declared for a customs procedure other than release for free circulation and provided that the market surveillance authorities do not object, the notice required by paragraph 1 or 2 shall also be included, under the same conditions as required by paragraph 1 or 2, in the documents used in connection with that procedure.
4.   Authorities designated under Article 25(1) may destroy or otherwise render inoperable a product which presents a risk to the health and safety of end users where the authority in question considers that it is necessary and proportionate to do so. The cost of such measure shall be borne by the natural or legal person declaring the product for free circulation.
Articles 197 and 198 of Regulation (EU) No 952/2013 shall apply accordingly.
CHAPTER VIII

COORDINATED ENFORCEMENT AND INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION

