Article 21
Union testing facilities
1.   The objective of the Union testing facilities is to contribute to enhancing laboratory capacity, as well as to ensuring the reliability and consistency of testing, for the purposes of market surveillance within the Union.
2.   For the purposes of paragraph 1, the Commission may designate a public testing facility of a Member State as a Union testing facility for specific categories of products or for specific risks related to a category of products.
The Commission may also designate one of its own testing facilities as a Union testing facility for specific categories of products or for specific risks related to a category of products, or for products for which testing capacity is missing or is not sufficient.
3.   Union testing facilities shall be accredited in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 765/2008.
4.   The designation of Union testing facilities shall not affect the freedom of market surveillance authorities, the Network and the Commission to choose testing facilities for the purpose of their activities.
5.   Designated Union testing facilities shall provide their services solely to market surveillance authorities, the Network, the Commission and other government or intergovernmental entities.
6.   Union testing facilities shall, within the area of their competence, perform the following activities:
(a)
carry out testing of products at the request of market surveillance authorities, the Network or the Commission;
(b)
provide independent technical or scientific advice at the request of the Network;
(c)
develop new techniques and methods of analysis.
7.   The activities referred to in paragraph 6 of this Article shall be remunerated and may be financed by the Union in accordance with Article 36(2).
8.   Union testing facilities may receive financing by the Union in accordance with Article 36(2) in order to increase their testing capacity or to create new testing capacity for specific categories of products or for specific risks related to a category of products for which the testing capacity is missing or is insufficient.
9.   The Commission shall adopt implementing acts specifying the procedures for the designation of Union testing facilities. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 43(2).
