Article 13
National market surveillance strategies
1.   Each Member State shall draw up an overarching national market surveillance strategy, at least every four years. Each Member State shall draw up the first such strategy by 16 July 2022. The national strategy shall promote a consistent, comprehensive and integrated approach to market surveillance and to the enforcement of Union harmonisation legislation within the territory of the Member State. When drawing up the national market surveillance strategy, all sectors covered by the Union harmonisation legislation and all stages of the product supply chain, including imports and digital supply chains, shall be considered. The priorities set out within the work programme of the Network may also be considered.
2.   The national market surveillance strategy shall include at least the following elements, when this does not compromise market surveillance activities:
(a)
the available information on the occurrence of non-compliant products, in particular taking into account the checks and controls referred to in Articles 11(3) and 25(3), respectively, and, where applicable, market trends that may affect non-compliance rates for the categories of products, and possible threats and risks related to emerging technologies;
(b)
the areas identified by the Member States as priorities for the enforcement of Union harmonisation legislation;
(c)
the enforcement activities planned in order to reduce non-compliance in those areas identified as priorities, including, where relevant, the minimum control levels envisaged for categories of products which have significant levels of non-compliance;
(d)
an assessment of the cooperation with market surveillance authorities in other Member States, as referred to in Article 11(8) and Chapter VI.
3.   Member States shall communicate their national market surveillance strategy to the Commission and other Member States through the information and communication system referred to in Article 34. Each Member State shall publish a summary of its strategy.
