Article 16
Market surveillance measures
1.   Market surveillance authorities shall take appropriate measures if a product subject to Union harmonisation legislation, when used in accordance with its intended purpose or under conditions which can be reasonably foreseen and when properly installed and maintained:
(a)
is liable to compromise the health or safety of users; or
(b)
does not conform to applicable Union harmonisation legislation.
2.   Where market surveillance authorities make findings referred to in point (a) or (b) of paragraph 1, they shall without delay require the relevant economic operator to take appropriate and proportionate corrective action to bring the non-compliance to an end or to eliminate the risk within a period they specify.
3.   For the purposes of paragraph 2, the corrective action required to be taken by the economic operator may include, inter alia:
(a)
bringing the product into compliance, including by rectifying formal non-compliance as defined by the applicable Union harmonisation legislation, or by ensuring that the product no longer presents a risk;
(b)
preventing the product from being made available on the market;
(c)
withdrawing or recalling the product immediately and alerting the public to the risk presented;
(d)
destroying the product or otherwise rendering it inoperable;
(e)
affixing to the product suitable, clearly worded, easily comprehensible warnings of the risks that it might present, in the language or languages determined by the Member State in which the product is made available on the market;
(f)
setting prior conditions for making the product concerned available on the market;
(g)
alerting the end users at risk immediately and in an appropriate form, including by publication of special warnings in the language or languages determined by the Member State in which the product is made available on the market.
4.   Corrective actions referred to in points (e), (f) and (g) of paragraph 3 may only be required in cases where the product is liable to present a risk only in certain conditions or only to certain end users.
5.   If the economic operator fails to take corrective action referred to in paragraph 3 or where the non-compliance or the risk referred to in paragraph 1 persists, market surveillance authorities shall ensure that the product is withdrawn or recalled, or that its being made available on the market is prohibited or restricted, and that the public, the Commission and the other Member States are informed accordingly.
6.   The information to the Commission and the other Member States pursuant to paragraph 5 of this Article shall be communicated through the information and communication system referred to in Article 34. That communication of information shall also be deemed to fulfil notification requirements for the applicable safeguard procedures of Union harmonisation legislation.
7.   Where a national measure is considered to be justified in accordance with the applicable safeguard procedure, or where no market surveillance authority of another Member State concluded the contrary as referred to in Article 11(9), the competent market surveillance authorities in the other Member States shall take the necessary measures in respect of the non-compliant product and shall enter the relevant information in the information and communication system referred to in Article 34.
