Article 9
Certification
1.   Member States shall designate competent authorities to carry out the certification of recipients established on their territory of defence-related products under transfer licences published by other Member States in accordance with Article 5(2)(b).
2.   The certification shall establish the reliability of the recipient undertaking, in particular as regards its capacity to observe export limitations of defence-related products received under a transfer licence from another Member State. Reliability shall be assessed according to the following criteria:
(a)
proven experience in defence activities, taking into account in particular the undertaking’s record of compliance with export restrictions, any court decisions on this matter, any authorisation to produce or commercialise defence-related products and the employment of experienced management staff;
(b)
relevant industrial activity in defence-related products within the Community, in particular capacity for system/sub-system integration;
(c)
the appointment of a senior executive as the dedicated officer personally responsible for transfers and exports;
(d)
a written commitment of the undertaking, signed by the senior executive referred to in point (c), that the undertaking will take all necessary steps to observe and enforce all specific conditions related to the end-use and export of any specific component or product received;
(e)
a written commitment of the undertaking, signed by the senior executive referred to in point (c), to provide to the competent authorities, with due diligence, detailed information in response to requests and inquiries concerning the end-users or end-use of all products exported, transferred or received under a transfer licence from another Member State; and
(f)
a description, countersigned by the senior executive referred to in point (c), of the internal compliance programme or transfer and export management system implemented in the undertaking. This description shall provide details of the organisational, human and technical resources allocated to the management of transfers and exports, the chain of responsibility within the undertaking, internal audit procedures, awareness-raising and staff training, physical and technical security arrangements, record-keeping and traceability of transfers and exports.
3.   Certificates shall contain the following information:
(a)
the competent authority issuing the certificate;
(b)
the name and address of the recipient;
(c)
a statement of the conformity of the recipient with the criteria referred to in paragraph 2; and
(d)
the date of issue and period of validity of the certificate.
The period of validity of the certificate referred to in point (d) shall in any case not exceed five years.
4.   Certificates may contain further conditions relating to the following:
(a)
the provision of information required for the verification of compliance with the criteria referred to in paragraph 2;
(b)
the suspension or revocation of the certificate.
5.   Competent authorities shall monitor the compliance of the recipient with the criteria referred to in paragraph 2 at least every three years, and with any condition attached to the certificates referred to in paragraph 4.
6.   Member States shall recognise any certificates issued in accordance with this Directive in another Member State.
7.   If a competent authority finds that the holder of a certificate established on the territory of its Member State no longer satisfies the criteria referred to in paragraph 2 or any of the conditions referred to in paragraph 4, it shall take appropriate measures. Such measures may include revoking the certificate. The competent authority shall inform the Commission and the other Member States of its decision.
8.   Member States shall publish and regularly update a list of certified recipients and inform the Commission, the European Parliament and the other Member States thereof.
The Commission shall make publicly available on its website a central register of recipients certified by Member States.
