Article 4
European Repair Information Form
1.   Repairers may provide the consumer with the European Repair Information Form set out in Annex I. The European Repair Information Form shall be provided on a durable medium and within a reasonable period of time after the request and before the consumer is bound by a contract for the provision of repair services.
2.   The European Repair Information Form shall be provided free of charge.
3.   By way of derogation from paragraph 2, where a diagnostic service, including a physical or remote examination, is needed to identify the nature of the defect, the type of repair and to estimate the price of repair, the repairer may request the consumer to pay the necessary costs of this service.
Without prejudice to Directive 2011/83/EU, the repairer shall inform the consumer about the costs of the diagnostic service.
4.   The European Repair Information Form shall specify the following conditions of repair in a clear and comprehensible manner:
(a)
the identity of the repairer;
(b)
the geographical address at which the repairer is established as well as the repairer’s telephone number and email address and, if available, other means of online communication which enable the consumer to contact, and communicate with, the repairer in a quick, efficient and accessible manner;
(c)
the good to be repaired;
(d)
the nature of the defect and the type of repair suggested;
(e)
the price or, if the price cannot reasonably be calculated in advance, the manner in which the price is to be calculated and the maximum price for the repair;
(f)
the time needed to complete the repair;
(g)
the availability of temporary replacement goods during the time of repair and the costs of temporary replacement, if any, for the consumer;
(h)
the place where the consumer hands over the good for repair;
(i)
where applicable, the availability of ancillary services, such as removal, installation and transportation, offered by the repairer, and the detailed costs of those services, if any, for the consumer;
(j)
the period of validity of the European Repair Information Form;
(k)
where applicable, additional information.
5.   The repairer shall not alter the conditions of repair specified in the European Repair Information Form for a period of 30 calendar days from the date on which that form was provided to the consumer. The repairer and the consumer may agree on a longer period of validity for the European Repair Information Form. Where the consumer accepts, within the period of validity, the conditions set out in the European Repair Information Form, the repairer shall be obliged to perform the repair service under those conditions.
6.   Where the repairer has supplied a complete and accurate European Repair Information Form to the consumer, it shall be deemed to have complied with the following requirements:
(a)
information requirements regarding the main features of the repair service laid down in Article 5(1) point (a), and Article 6(1), point (a), of Directive 2011/83/EU and Article 22(1), point (j), of Directive 2006/123/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (24);
(b)
information requirements regarding the repairer’s identity and contact information laid down in Article 5(1), point (b), and Article (6)(1), points (b) and (c), of Directive 2011/83/EU, Article 22(1), point (a), of Directive 2006/123/EC and Article 5(1), points (a), (b) and (c), of Directive 2000/31/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (25);
(c)
information requirements regarding the price laid down in Articles 5(1), point (c), and Article 6(1), point (e), of Directive 2011/83/EU and Article 22(1), point (i), and (3), point (a), of Directive 2006/123/EC;
(d)
information requirements regarding the arrangements for the performance and the time to perform the repair service laid down in Articles 5(1), point (d), and Article 6(1), point (g), of Directive 2011/83/EU.
