Article 16
Amendment to Directive (EU) 2019/771
Directive (EU) 2019/771 is amended as follows:
(1)
in Article 7(1), point (d) is replaced by the following:
‘(d)
be of the quantity and possess the qualities and other features, including in relation to durability, repairability, functionality, compatibility and security normal for goods of the same type and which the consumer may reasonably expect given the nature of the goods and taking into account any public statement made by or on behalf of the seller, or other persons in previous links of the chain of transactions, including the producer, particularly in advertising or on labelling.’
;
(2)
Article 10 is amended as follows:
(a)
the following paragraph is inserted:
‘2a.   Where, in accordance with Article 13(2), repair takes place as the remedy to bring the goods into conformity, the liability period shall be extended once by 12 months.’
(b)
paragraph 3 is replaced by the following:
‘3.   Member States may maintain or introduce longer time limits than those referred to in paragraphs 1, 2 and 2a.’
(c)
the following paragraph is inserted:
‘5a.   Member States which, in accordance with paragraph 3 or paragraph 5, do not provide for fixed time limits for the liability of the seller or only provide a limitation period for the remedies, may derogate from paragraph 2a provided that they ensure that the liability of the seller or the limitation period for remedies in the event of repair is at least equivalent to three years.’
(3)
in Article 13, the following paragraph is inserted:
‘2a.   Before the seller provides the remedy to bring the goods into conformity, the seller shall inform the consumer about the consumer’s right to choose between repair and replacement, as well as about the possible extension of the liability period, provided for in Article 10(2a).’
(4)
in Article 14, paragraph 1 is replaced by the following:
‘1.   Repairs or replacements shall be carried out:
(a)
free of charge;
(b)
within a reasonable period of time from the moment the seller has been informed by the consumer about the lack of conformity;
(c)
without any significant inconvenience to the consumer, taking into account the nature of the goods and the purpose for which the consumer required the goods.
During repair, depending on the specificities of the relevant category of goods, in particular of the need of the consumer to have such goods permanently available, the seller may provide the consumer free of charge with a replacement good, including a refurbished good, on loan.
The seller may provide, at the explicit request of the consumer, a refurbished good to fulfil his obligation to replace the good.’.
