Article 4
National emission reduction commitments
1.   Member States shall, as a minimum, limit their annual anthropogenic emissions of sulphur dioxide, nitrogen oxides, non-methane volatile organic compounds, ammonia and fine particulate matter in accordance with the national emission reduction commitments applicable from 2020 to 2029 and from 2030 onwards, as laid down in Annex II.
2.   Without prejudice to paragraph 1, Member States shall take the necessary measures aimed at limiting their 2025 anthropogenic emissions of sulphur dioxide, nitrogen oxides, non-methane volatile organic compounds, ammonia and fine particulate matter. The indicative levels of those emissions shall be determined by a linear reduction trajectory established between their emission levels defined by the emission reduction commitments for 2020 and the emission levels defined by the emission reduction commitments for 2030.
Member States may follow a non-linear reduction trajectory if this is economically or technically more efficient, and provided that as from 2025 it converges progressively on the linear reduction trajectory and that it does not affect any emission reduction commitment for 2030. Member States shall set out that non-linear reduction trajectory and the reasons for following it in the national air pollution control programmes to be submitted to the Commission in accordance with Article 10(1).
Where the emissions for 2025 cannot be limited in accordance with the determined reduction trajectory, Member States shall explain the reasons for that deviation as well as the measures that would bring the Member States back on their trajectory in the subsequent informative inventory reports to be provided to the Commission in accordance with Article 10(2).
3.   The following emissions are not accounted for the purpose of complying with paragraphs 1 and 2:
(a)
aircraft emissions beyond the landing and take-off cycle;
(b)
emissions from national maritime traffic to and from the territories referred to in Article 2(2);
(c)
emissions from international maritime traffic;
(d)
emissions of nitrogen oxides and non-methane volatile organic compounds from activities falling under the 2014 Nomenclature for Reporting (NFR) as provided by the LRTAP Convention categories 3B (manure management) and 3D (agricultural soils).
