Article 5
Flexibilities
1.   Member States may establish, in accordance with Part 4 of Annex IV, adjusted annual national emission inventories for sulphur dioxide, nitrogen oxides, non-methane volatile organic compounds, ammonia and fine particulate matter where non-compliance with their national emission reduction commitments would result from applying improved emission inventory methods updated in accordance with scientific knowledge.
For the purpose of determining whether the relevant conditions set out in Part 4 of Annex IV are fulfilled, the emission reduction commitments for the years 2020 to 2029 shall be considered as having been set on 4 May 2012.
As from 2025 the following additional conditions shall apply to adjustments in case of there being significantly different emission factors or methodologies used for determining emissions from specific source categories in comparison with those which were expected as a result of the implementation of a given norm or standard under Union source-based air pollution control legislation, pursuant to points 1(d)(ii) and (iii) of Part 4 of Annex IV:
(a)
the Member State concerned, after having taken into account the findings of national inspection and enforcement programmes monitoring the effectiveness of Union source-based air pollution control legislation, demonstrates that the significantly different emission factors do not arise from its domestic implementation or enforcement of that legislation;
(b)
the Member State concerned has informed the Commission of the significant difference in the emission factors which, pursuant to Article 11(2), shall investigate the need for further action.
2.   If in a given year a Member State, due to an exceptionally cold winter or an exceptionally dry summer, cannot comply with its emission reduction commitments, it may comply with those commitments by averaging its national annual emissions for the year in question, the year preceding that year and the year following it, provided that this average does not exceed the national annual emission level determined by the Member State's reduction commitment.
3.   If in a given year a Member State, for which one or more reduction commitments laid down in Annex II are set at a more stringent level than the cost-effective reduction identified in TSAP 16, cannot comply with the relevant emission reduction commitment after having implemented all cost-effective measures, it shall be deemed to comply with that relevant emission reduction commitment for a maximum of five years, provided that for each of those years it compensates for that non-compliance by an equivalent emission reduction of another pollutant referred to in Annex II.
4.   A Member State shall be deemed to comply with its obligations under Article 4 for a maximum of three years, where non-compliance with its emission reduction commitments for the relevant pollutants results from a sudden and exceptional interruption or loss of capacity in the power and/or heat supply or production system, which could not reasonably have been foreseen, and provided that the following conditions are met:
(a)
the Member State concerned has demonstrated that all reasonable efforts, including the implementation of new measures and policies have been made to ensure compliance, and will continue to be made to keep the period of non-compliance as short as possible; and
(b)
the Member State concerned has demonstrated that the implementation of measures and policies additional to those referred to in point (a) would lead to disproportionate costs, substantially jeopardise national energy security, or pose a substantial risk of energy poverty to a significant part of the population.
5.   Members States that intend to apply paragraph 1, 2, 3 or 4 shall inform the Commission thereof by 15 February of the reporting year concerned. That information shall include the pollutants and sectors concerned and, where available, the magnitude of the impacts upon national emission inventories.
6.   The Commission, assisted by the European Environment Agency, shall review and assess whether the use of any of the flexibilities for a particular year fulfils the relevant conditions set out in paragraph 1 of this Article and in Part 4 of Annex IV or in paragraphs 2, 3 or 4 of this Article, where applicable.
Where the Commission considers that the use of a given flexibility is not in accordance with the relevant conditions set out in paragraph 1 of this Article and in Part 4 of Annex IV, or in paragraphs 2, 3 or 4 of this Article, it shall adopt a decision within nine months from the date of receipt of the relevant report referred to in Article 8(4), informing the Member State concerned that the use of that flexibility cannot be accepted and stating the reasons for that refusal. Where the Commission has raised no objections within nine months from the date of receipt of the relevant report referred to in Article 8(4), the Member State concerned shall consider the use of that flexibility to be valid and accepted for that year.
7.   The Commission may adopt implementing acts specifying the detailed rules for the use of the flexibilities referred to in paragraphs 1, 2, 3 and 4 of this Article. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 17.
8.   The Commission, when exercising its powers under paragraphs 6 and 7, shall take into account the relevant guidance documents developed under the LRTAP Convention.
