Article 10
Reporting by Member States
1.   Member States shall provide their first national air pollution control programmes to the Commission by 1 April 2019.
Where a national air pollution control programme is updated under Article 6(4), the Member State concerned shall provide the updated programme to the Commission within two months.
The Commission shall examine the national air pollution control programmes and their updates in the light of the requirements set out in Article 4(2) and Article 6.
2.   Member States shall provide their national emission inventories and projections, spatially disaggregated national emission inventories, large point source inventories and the informative inventory reports referred to in Article 8(1), (2) and (3) and, where relevant, in Article 8(4), to the Commission and to the European Environment Agency in accordance with the reporting dates set out in Annex I.
This reporting shall be consistent with the reporting to the Secretariat of the LRTAP Convention.
3.   The Commission, assisted by the European Environment Agency and in consultation with the Member States concerned, shall review the national emission inventory data in the first year of reporting and regularly thereafter. That review shall involve the following:
(a)
checks to verify the transparency, accuracy, consistency, comparability and completeness of information submitted;
(b)
checks to identify cases where inventory data is prepared in a manner which is inconsistent with the requirements set out under international law, in particular under the LRTAP Convention;
(c)
where appropriate, calculation of the resulting technical corrections necessary, in consultation with the Member State concerned.
Where the Member State concerned and the Commission are unable to reach an agreement on the necessity or on the content of the technical corrections pursuant to point (c), the Commission shall adopt a decision laying down the technical corrections to be applied by the Member State concerned.
4.   Member States shall report the following information referred to in Article 9 to the Commission and the European Environment Agency:
(a)
by 1 July 2018 and every four years thereafter, the location of the monitoring sites and the associated indicators used for monitoring air pollution impacts; and
(b)
by 1 July 2019 and every four years thereafter, the monitoring data referred to in Article 9.
