Article 8
National emission inventories and projections, and informative inventory reports
1.   Member States shall prepare and annually update national emission inventories for the pollutants set out in Table A of Annex I, in accordance with the requirements set out therein.
Member States may prepare and annually update national emission inventories for the pollutants set out in Table B of Annex I, in accordance with the requirements set out therein.
2.   Member States shall prepare and update every four years spatially disaggregated national emission inventories and large point source inventories and, every two years, national emission projections for the pollutants set out in Table C of Annex I, in accordance with the requirements set out therein.
3.   Member States shall draw up an informative inventory report which shall accompany the national emission inventories and projections referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2, in accordance with the requirements set out in Table D of Annex I.
4.   Member States that opt for a flexibility under Article 5 shall include the information demonstrating that the use of that flexibility fulfils the relevant conditions set out in Article 5(1) and Part 4 of Annex IV or in Article 5(2), (3) or (4), where applicable, in the informative inventory report of the year concerned.
5.   Member States shall prepare and update the national emission inventories (including if appropriate adjusted national emission inventories), national emission projections, spatially disaggregated national emission inventories, large point source inventories and the accompanying informative inventory reports in accordance with Annex IV.
6.   The Commission, assisted by the European Environment Agency, shall annually prepare and update Union-wide emission inventories and an informative inventory report as well as, every two years, Union-wide emission projections and, every four years, spatially disaggregated Union-wide emission inventories and Union-wide large point source inventories, for the pollutants referred to in Annex I, on the basis of the information referred to in paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of this Article.
7.   The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 16 to amend this Directive with regard to the adaptation of Annex I and Annex IV to developments, including technical and scientific progress, within the framework of the LRTAP Convention.
