Article 216
Ultimate parent undertaking at national level
1.   Where the participating insurance or reinsurance undertaking or the insurance holding company which has its head office in the Community, referred to in Article 213(2)(a) and (b), does not have its head office in the same Member State as the ultimate parent undertaking at Community level referred to in Article 215, Member States may allow their supervisory authorities to decide, after consulting the group supervisor and that ultimate parent undertaking at Community level, to subject to group supervision the ultimate parent insurance or reinsurance undertaking or insurance holding company at national level.
In such a case, the supervisory authority shall explain its decision to both the group supervisor and the ultimate parent undertaking at Community level.
Articles 218 to 258 shall apply mutatis mutandis, subject to the provisions set out in paragraphs 2 to 6.
2.   The supervisory authority may restrict group supervision of the ultimate parent undertaking at national level to one or several sections of Chapter II.
3.   Where the supervisory authority decides to apply to the ultimate parent undertaking at national level Chapter II, Section 1, the choice of method made in accordance with Article 220 by the group supervisor in respect of the ultimate parent undertaking at Community level referred to in Article 215 shall be recognised as determinative and applied by the supervisory authority in the Member State concerned.
4.   Where the supervisory authority decides to apply to the ultimate parent undertaking at national level Chapter II, Section 1, and where the ultimate parent undertaking at Community level referred to in Article 215 has obtained, in accordance with Article 231 or Article 233(5), permission to calculate the group Solvency Capital Requirement, as well as the Solvency Capital Requirement of insurance and reinsurance undertakings in the group, on the basis of an internal model, that decision shall be recognised as determinative and applied by the supervisory authority in the Member State concerned.
In such a situation, where the supervisory authority considers that the risk profile of the ultimate parent undertaking at national level deviates significantly from the internal model approved at Community level, and as long as that undertaking does not properly address the concerns of the supervisory authority, that supervisory authority may decide to impose a capital add-on to the group Solvency Capital Requirement of that undertaking resulting from the application of such model or, in exceptional circumstances where such capital add-on would not be appropriate, to require that undertaking to calculate its group Solvency Capital Requirement on the basis of the standard formula.
The supervisory authority shall explain such decisions to both the undertaking and the group supervisor.
5.   Where the supervisory authority decides to apply Chapter II, Section 1 to the ultimate parent undertaking at national level, that undertaking shall not be permitted to introduce, in accordance with Articles 236 or 243, an application for permission to subject any of its subsidiaries to Articles 238 and 239.
6.   Where Member States allow their supervisory authorities to make the decision referred to in paragraph 1, they shall provide that no such decisions can be made or maintained where the ultimate parent undertaking at national level is a subsidiary of the ultimate parent undertaking at Community level referred to in Article 215 and the latter has obtained in accordance with Articles 237 or 243 permission for that subsidiary to be subject to Articles 238 and 239.
7.   The Commission may adopt implementing measures specifying the circumstances under which the decision referred to in paragraph 1 can be made.
Those measures, designed to amend non-essential elements of this Directive by supplementing it, shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 301(3).
