Article 167
Advantages to undertakings authorised in more than one Member State
1.   Any undertaking which has requested or obtained authorisation from more than one Member State may apply for the following advantages which may be granted only jointly:
(a)
the Solvency Capital Requirement referred to in Article 166 shall be calculated in relation to the entire business which it pursues within the Community;
(b)
the deposit required under Article 162(2)(e) shall be lodged in only one of those Member States;
(c)
the assets representing the Minimum Capital Requirement shall be localised, in accordance with Article 134, in any one of the Member States in which it pursues its activities.
In the cases referred to in point (a) of the first subparagraph, account shall be taken only of the operations effected by all the branches established within the Community for the purposes of this calculation.
2.   Application to benefit from the advantages provided for in paragraph 1 shall be made to the supervisory authorities of the Member States concerned. The application shall state the authority of the Member State which in future is to supervise the solvency of the entire business of the branches established within the Community. Reasons must be given for the choice of authority made by the undertaking.
The deposit referred to in Article 162(2)(e) shall be lodged with that Member State.
3.   The advantages provided for in paragraph 1 may be granted only where the supervisory authorities of all Member States in which an application has been made agree to them.
Those advantages shall take effect from the time when the selected supervisory authority informs the other supervisory authorities that it will supervise the state of solvency of the entire business of the branches within the Community.
The supervisory authority selected shall obtain from the other Member States the information necessary for the supervision of the overall solvency of the branches established in their territory.
4.   At the request of one or more of the Member States concerned, the advantages granted under paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 shall be withdrawn simultaneously by all Member States concerned.
