Article 249
Cooperation and exchange of information between supervisory authorities
1.   The authorities responsible for the supervision of the individual insurance and reinsurance undertakings in a group and the group supervisor shall cooperate closely, in particular in cases where an insurance or reinsurance undertaking encounters financial difficulties.
With the objective of ensuring that the supervisory authorities, including the group supervisor, have the same amount of relevant information available to them, without prejudice to their respective responsibilities, and irrespective of whether they are established in the same Member State, they shall provide one another with such information in order to allow and facilitate the exercise of the supervisory tasks of the other authorities under this Directive. In that regard, the supervisory authorities concerned and the group supervisor shall communicate to one another without delay all relevant information as soon as it becomes available. The information referred to in this subparagraph includes, but is not limited to, information about actions of the group and supervisory authorities, and information provided by the group.
2.   The authorities responsible for the supervision of the individual insurance and reinsurance undertakings in a group and the group supervisor shall each call immediately for a meeting of all supervisory authorities involved in group supervision in at least the following circumstances:
(a)
where they become aware of a significant breach of the Solvency Capital Requirement or a breach of the Minimum Capital Requirement of an individual insurance or reinsurance undertaking;
(b)
where they become aware of a significant breach of the Solvency Capital Requirement at group level calculated on the basis of consolidated data or the aggregated group Solvency Capital Requirement, in accordance with whichever calculation method is used in accordance with Title III, Chapter II, Section 1, Subsection 4;
(c)
where other exceptional circumstances are occurring or have occurred.
3.   The Commission shall adopt implementing measures determining the items which are, on a systematic basis, to be gathered by the group supervisor and disseminated to other supervisory authorities concerned or to be transmitted to the group supervisor by the other supervisory authorities concerned.
The Commission shall adopt implementing measures specifying the items essential or relevant for supervision at group level with a view to enhancing convergence of supervisory reporting.
The measures referred to in this paragraph, designed to amend non-essential elements of this Directive by supplementing it, shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 301(3).
