Article 238
Subsidiaries of an insurance or reinsurance undertaking: determination of the Solvency Capital Requirement
1.   Without prejudice to Article 231, the Solvency Capital Requirement of the subsidiary shall be calculated as set out in paragraphs 2, 4, and 5 of this Article.
2.   Where the Solvency Capital Requirement of the subsidiary is calculated on the basis of an internal model approved at group level in accordance with Article 231 and the supervisory authority having authorised the subsidiary considers that its risk profile deviates significantly from this internal model, and as long as that undertaking does not properly address the concerns of the supervisory authority, that authority may, in the cases referred to in Article 37, propose to set a capital add-on to the Solvency Capital Requirement of that subsidiary resulting from the application of such model or, in exceptional circumstances where such capital add-on would not be appropriate, to require that undertaking to calculate its Solvency Capital Requirement on the basis of the standard formula. The supervisory authority shall discuss its proposal within the college of supervisors and communicate the grounds for such proposals to both the subsidiary and the college of supervisors.
3.   Where the Solvency Capital Requirement of the subsidiary is calculated on the basis of the standard formula and the supervisory authority having authorised the subsidiary considers that its risk profile deviates significantly from the assumptions underlying the standard formula, and as long as that undertaking does not properly address the concerns of the supervisory authority, that authority may, in exceptional circumstances, propose that the undertaking replace a subset of the parameters used in the standard formula calculation by parameters specific to that undertaking when calculating the life, non-life and health underwriting risk modules, as set out in Article 110, or in the cases referred to in Article 37, to set a capital add-on to the Solvency Capital Requirement of that subsidiary.
The supervisory authority shall discuss its proposal within the college of supervisors and communicate the grounds for such proposal to both the subsidiary and the college of supervisors.
4.   The college of supervisors shall do everything within its power to reach an agreement on the proposal of the supervisory authority having authorised the subsidiary or on other possible measures.
5.   Where the supervisory authority and the group supervisor disagree, the matter shall, within one month from the proposal of the supervisory authority, be referred for consultation to CEIOPS, which shall give its advice within two months of such referral.
The supervisory authority having authorised that subsidiary shall duly consider such advice before taking its final decision.
The decision shall state the full reasons and shall take into account the views including reservations of the other supervisory authorities within the college of supervisors and the advice from CEIOPS.
The decision shall be submitted to the subsidiary and to the college of supervisors.
