Article 59
Assessment
1.   In assessing the notification provided for in Article 57(1) and the information referred to in Article 58(2) the supervisory authorities shall, in order to ensure the sound and prudent management of the insurance or reinsurance undertaking in which an acquisition is proposed, and having regard to the likely influence of the proposed acquirer on the insurance or reinsurance undertaking, appraise the suitability of the proposed acquirer and the financial soundness of the proposed acquisition against all of the following criteria:
(a)
the reputation of the proposed acquirer;
(b)
the reputation and experience of any person who will direct the business of the insurance or reinsurance undertaking as a result of the proposed acquisition;
(c)
the financial soundness of the proposed acquirer, in particular in relation to the type of business pursued and envisaged in the insurance or reinsurance undertaking in which the acquisition is proposed;
(d)
whether the insurance or reinsurance undertaking will be able to comply and continue to comply with the prudential requirements based on this Directive and, where applicable, other Directives, notably, Directive 2002/87/EC, in particular, whether the group of which it will become part has a structure that makes it possible to exercise effective supervision, effectively exchange information among the supervisory authorities and determine the allocation of responsibilities among the supervisory authorities;
(e)
whether there are reasonable grounds to suspect that, in connection with the proposed acquisition, money laundering or terrorist financing within the meaning of Article 1 of Directive 2005/60/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 October 2005 on the prevention of the use of the financial system for the purpose of money laundering and terrorist financing (33) is being or has been committed or attempted, or that the proposed acquisition could increase the risk thereof.
2.   The supervisory authorities may oppose the proposed acquisition only if there are reasonable grounds for doing so on the basis of the criteria set out in paragraph 1 or if the information provided by the proposed acquirer is incomplete.
3.   Member States shall neither impose any prior conditions in respect of the level of holding that must be acquired nor allow their supervisory authorities to examine the proposed acquisition in terms of the economic needs of the market.
4.   Member States shall make publicly available a list specifying the information that is necessary to carry out the assessment and that must be provided to the supervisory authorities at the time of notification referred to in Article 57(1). The information required shall be proportionate and adapted to the nature of the proposed acquirer and the proposed acquisition. Member States shall not require information that is not relevant for a prudential assessment.
5.   Notwithstanding Article 58(1), (2) and (3), where two or more proposals to acquire or increase qualifying holdings in the same insurance or reinsurance undertaking have been notified to the supervisory authority, the latter shall treat the proposed acquirers in a non-discriminatory manner.
