Article 244
Supervision of risk concentration
1.   Supervision of the risk concentration at group level shall be exercised in accordance with paragraphs 2 and 3 of this Article, Article 246 and Chapter III.
2.   The Member States shall require insurance and reinsurance undertakings or insurance holding companies to report on a regular basis and at least annually to the group supervisor any significant risk concentration at the level of the group.
The necessary information shall be submitted to the group supervisor by the insurance or reinsurance undertaking which is at the head of the group or, where the group is not headed by a insurance or reinsurance undertaking, by the insurance holding company or by the insurance or reinsurance undertaking in the group identified by the group supervisor after consulting the other supervisory authorities concerned and the group.
The risk concentrations shall be subject to supervisory review by the group supervisor.
3.   The group supervisor, after consulting the other supervisory authorities concerned and the group, shall identify the type of risks insurance and reinsurance undertakings in a particular group shall report in all circumstances.
When defining or giving their opinion about the type of risks, the group supervisor and the other supervisory authorities concerned shall take into account the specific group and risk-management structure of the group.
In order to identify significant risk concentration to be reported, the group supervisor, after consulting the other supervisory authorities concerned and the group, shall impose appropriate thresholds based on solvency capital requirements, technical provisions, or both.
When reviewing the risk concentrations, the group supervisor shall in particular monitor the possible risk of contagion in the group, the risk of a conflict of interests, and the level or volume of risks.
4.   The Commission may adopt implementing measures, as regards the definition and identification of a significant risk concentration and the reporting on such a risk concentration, for the purposes of paragraphs 2 and 3.
Those measures, designed to amend non-essential elements of this Directive by supplementing it, shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 301(3).
