Article 185
Information for policy holders
1.   Before the life insurance contract is concluded, at least the information set out in paragraphs 2 to 4 shall be communicated to the policy holder.
2.   The following information about the life insurance undertaking shall be communicated:
(a)
the name of the undertaking and its legal form;
(b)
the name of the Member State in which the head office and, where appropriate, the branch concluding the contract is situated;
(c)
the address of the head office and, where appropriate, of the branch concluding the contract;
(d)
a concrete reference to the report on the solvency and financial condition as laid down in Article 51, allowing the policy holder easy access to this information.
3.   The following information relating to the commitment shall be communicated:
(a)
the definition of each benefit and each option;
(b)
the term of the contract;
(c)
the means of terminating the contract;
(d)
the means of payment of premiums and duration of payments;
(e)
the means of calculation and distribution of bonuses;
(f)
an indication of surrender and paid-up values and the extent to which they are guaranteed;
(g)
information on the premiums for each benefit, both main benefits and supplementary benefits, where appropriate;
(h)
for unit-linked policies, the definition of the units to which the benefits are linked;
(i)
an indication of the nature of the underlying assets for unit-linked policies;
(j)
arrangements for application of the cooling-off period;
(k)
general information on the tax arrangements applicable to the type of policy;
(l)
the arrangements for handling complaints concerning contracts by policy holders, lives assured or beneficiaries under contracts including, where appropriate, the existence of a complaints body, without prejudice to the right to take legal proceedings;
(m)
the law applicable to the contract where the parties do not have a free choice or, where the parties are free to choose the law applicable, the law the life insurance undertaking proposes to choose.
4.   In addition, specific information shall be supplied in order to provide a proper understanding of the risks underlying the contract which are assumed by the policy holder.
5.   The policy holder shall be kept informed throughout the term of the contract of any change concerning the following information:
(a)
the policy conditions, both general and special;
(b)
the name of the life insurance undertaking, its legal form or the address of its head office and, where appropriate, of the branch which concluded the contract;
(c)
all the information listed in points (d) to (j) of paragraph 3 in the event of a change in the policy conditions or amendment of the law applicable to the contract;
(d)
annually, information on the state of bonuses.
Where, in connection with an offer for or conclusion of a life insurance contract, the insurer provides figures relating to the amount of potential payments above and beyond the contractually agreed payments, the insurer shall provide the policy holder with a specimen calculation whereby the potential maturity payment is set out applying the basis for the premium calculation using three different rates of interest. This shall not apply to term insurances and contracts. The insurer shall inform the policy holder in a clear and comprehensible manner that the specimen calculation is only a model of computation based on notional assumptions, and that the policy holder shall not derive any contractual claims from the specimen calculation.
In the case of insurances with profit participation, the insurer shall inform the policy holder annually in writing of the status of the claims of the policy holder, incorporating the profit participation. Furthermore, where the insurer has provided figures about the potential future development of the profit participation, the insurer shall inform the policy holder of differences between the actual development and the initial data.
6.   The information referred to in paragraphs 2 to 5 shall be provided in a clear and accurate manner, in writing, in an official language of the Member State of the commitment.
However, such information may be in another language if the policy holder so requests and the law of the Member State so permits or the policy holder is free to choose the law applicable.
7.   The Member State of the commitment may require life insurance undertakings to furnish information in addition to that listed in paragraphs 2 to 5 only if it is necessary for a proper understanding by the policy holder of the essential elements of the commitment.
8.   The detailed rules for implementing paragraphs 1 to 7 shall be laid down by the Member State of the commitment.
