Article 260
Parent undertakings outside the Community: verification of equivalence
1.   In the case referred to in Article 213(2)(c), the supervisory authorities concerned shall verify whether the insurance and reinsurance undertakings, the parent undertaking of which has its head office outside the Community, are subject to supervision, by a third-country supervisory authority, which is equivalent to that provided for by this Title on the supervision at the level of the group of insurance and reinsurance undertakings referred to in Article 213(2)(a) and (b).
The verification shall be carried out by the supervisory authority which would be the group supervisor if the criteria set out in Article 247(2) were to apply, at the request of the parent undertaking or of any of the insurance and reinsurance undertakings authorised in the Community or on its own initiative, unless the Commission had concluded previously in respect of the equivalence of the third country concerned. In so doing, that supervisory authority shall consult the other supervisory authorities concerned and CEIOPS, before taking a decision.
2.   The Commission may adopt implementing measures specifying the criteria to assess whether the prudential regime in a third country for the supervision of groups is equivalent to that laid down in this Title. Those measures, designed to amend non-essential elements of this Directive by supplementing it, shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 301(3).
3.   The Commission may adopt, after consultation of the European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Committee and in accordance with the regulatory procedure referred to in Article 301(2), and taking into account the criteria adopted in accordance with paragraph 2, a decision as to whether the prudential regime for the supervision of groups in a third country is equivalent to that laid down in this Title.
Those decisions shall be regularly reviewed to take into account any changes to the prudential regime for the supervision of groups laid down in this Title and to the prudential regime in the third country for the supervision of groups and to any other change in regulation that may affect the decision on equivalence.
When a decision has been adopted by the Commission, in accordance with the first subparagraph, in respect of a third country, that decision shall be recognised as determinative for the purposes of the verification referred to in paragraph 1.
