Article 258
Enforcement measures
1.   Where the insurance or reinsurance undertakings in a group do not comply with the requirements referred to in Articles 218 to 246 or where the requirements are met but solvency may nevertheless be jeopardised or where the intra-group transactions or the risk concentrations are a threat to the financial position of the insurance or reinsurance undertakings, the following shall require the necessary measures in order to rectify the situation as soon as possible:
(a)
the group supervisor with respect to the insurance holding company;
(b)
the supervisory authorities with respect to the insurance and reinsurance undertakings.
Where, in the case referred to in point (a) of the first subparagraph, the group supervisor is not one of the supervisory authorities of the Member State in which the insurance holding company has its head office, the group supervisor shall inform those supervisory authorities of its findings with a view to enabling them to take the necessary measures.
Where, in the case referred to in point (b) of the first subparagraph, the group supervisor is not one of the supervisory authorities of the Member State in which the insurance or reinsurance undertaking has its head office, the group supervisor shall inform those supervisory authorities of its findings with a view to enabling them to take the necessary measures.
Without prejudice to paragraph 2, Member States shall determine the measures which may be taken by their supervisory authorities with respect to insurance holding companies.
The supervisory authorities concerned, including the group supervisor, shall where appropriate coordinate their enforcement measures.
2.   Without prejudice to their criminal law provisions, Member States shall ensure that sanctions or measures may be imposed on insurance holding companies which infringe laws, regulations or administrative provisions enacted to implement this Title, or on the person effectively managing those companies. The supervisory authorities shall cooperate closely to ensure that such sanctions or measures are effective, especially when the central administration or main establishment of an insurance holding company is not located at its head office.
3.   The Commission may adopt implementing measures for the coordination of enforcement measures referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2.
Those measures, designed to amend non-essential elements of this Directive by supplementing it, shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 301(3).
