Article 164
Transfer of portfolio
1.   Under the conditions laid down by national law, Member States shall authorise branches set up within their territory and covered by this Chapter to transfer all or part of their portfolios of contracts to an accepting undertaking established in the same Member State where the supervisory authorities of that Member State or, where appropriate, of the Member State referred to in Article 167, certify that after taking the transfer into account the accepting undertaking possesses the necessary eligible own funds to cover the Solvency Capital Requirement referred to in the first paragraph of Article 100.
2.   Under the conditions laid down by national law, Member States shall authorise branches set up within their territory and covered by this Chapter to transfer all or part of their portfolios of contracts to an insurance undertaking with a head office in another Member State where the supervisory authorities of that Member State certify that after taking the transfer into account the accepting undertaking possesses the necessary eligible own funds to cover the Solvency Capital Requirement referred to in the first paragraph of Article 100.
3.   Where under the conditions laid down by national law, a Member State authorises branches set up within its territory and covered by this Chapter to transfer all or part of their portfolios of contracts to a branch covered by this Chapter and set up within the territory of another Member State, it shall ensure that the supervisory authorities of the Member State of the accepting undertaking or, if appropriate, of the Member State referred to in Article 167 certify that:
(a)
after taking the transfer into account the accepting undertaking possesses the necessary eligible own funds to cover the Solvency Capital Requirement;
(b)
the law of the Member State of the accepting undertaking permits such a transfer; and
(c)
that Member State has agreed to the transfer.
4.   In the circumstances referred to in paragraphs 1 to 3, the Member State in which the transferring branch is situated shall authorise the transfer after obtaining the agreement of the supervisory authorities of the Member State in which the risks are situated, or the Member State of the commitment, where different from the Member State in which the transferring branch is situated.
5.   The supervisory authorities of the Member States consulted shall give their opinion or consent to the supervisory authorities of the home Member State of the transferring branch within three months of receiving a request. The absence of any response from the authorities consulted within that period shall be considered equivalent to a favourable opinion or tacit consent.
6.   A transfer authorised in accordance with paragraphs 1 to 5 shall be published as laid down by national law in the Member State in which the risk is situated or the Member State of the commitment.
Such transfers shall automatically be valid against policy holders, insured persons and any other persons having rights or obligations arising out of the contracts transferred.
