Article 247
Group Supervisor
1.   A single supervisor, responsible for coordination and exercise of group supervision (group supervisor), shall be designated from among the supervisory authorities of the Member States concerned.
2.   Where the same supervisory authority is competent for all insurance and reinsurance undertakings in a group, the task of group supervisor shall be exercised by that supervisory authority.
In all other cases and subject to paragraph 3, the task of group supervisor shall be exercised:
(a)
where a group is headed by an insurance or reinsurance undertaking, by the supervisory authority which has authorised that undertaking;
(b)
where a group is not headed by an insurance or reinsurance undertaking, by the supervisory authority identified in accordance with the following:
(i)
where the parent of an insurance or reinsurance undertaking is an insurance holding company, by the supervisory authority which has authorised that insurance or reinsurance undertaking;
(ii)
where more than one insurance or reinsurance undertaking with a head office in the Community have as their parent the same insurance holding company, and one of those undertakings has been authorised in the Member State in which the insurance holding company has its head office, by the supervisory authority of the insurance or reinsurance undertaking authorised in that Member State;
(iii)
where the group is headed by more than one insurance holding company with a head office in different Member States and there is an insurance or reinsurance undertaking in each of those Member States, by the supervisory authority of the insurance or reinsurance undertaking with the largest balance sheet total;
(iv)
where more than one insurance or reinsurance undertaking with a head office in the Community have as their parent the same insurance holding company and none of those undertakings has been authorised in the Member State in which the insurance holding company has its head office, by the supervisory authority which authorised the insurance or reinsurance undertaking with the largest balance sheet total; or
(v)
where the group is a group without a parent undertaking, or in any circumstances not referred to in points (i) to (iv) by the supervisory authority which authorised the insurance or reinsurance undertaking with the largest balance sheet total.
3.   In particular cases, the supervisory authorities concerned may, at the request of any of the authorities, take a joint decision to derogate from the criteria set out in paragraph 2 where their application would be inappropriate, taking into account the structure of the group and the relative importance of the insurance and reinsurance undertakings’ activities in different countries, and designate a different supervisory authority as group supervisor.
For that purpose, any of the supervisory authorities concerned may request that a discussion be opened on whether the criteria referred to in paragraph 2 are appropriate. Such a discussion shall not take place more often than annually.
The supervisory authorities concerned shall do everything within their power to reach a joint decision on the choice of the group supervisor within three months from the request for discussion. Before taking their decision, the supervisory authorities concerned shall give the group an opportunity to state its opinion.
4.   During the three-month period referred to in the third subparagraph of paragraph 3, any of the supervisory authorities concerned may request that CEIOPS be consulted. In the event that CEIOPS is consulted, that period shall be extended by two months.
5.   In the event that CEIOPS is consulted, the supervisory authorities concerned shall duly take into account the advice of CEIOPS before taking their joint decision. The joint decision shall state the full reasons and shall contain an explanation of any significant deviation from any advice given by CEIOPS.
6.   In the absence of a joint decision derogating from the criteria set out in paragraph 2, the task of group supervisor shall be exercised by the supervisory authority identified in accordance with paragraph 2.
7.   CEIOPS shall inform the European Parliament, the Council and the Commission, at least annually, of any major difficulties with the application of paragraphs 2, 3 and 6.
In the event that any major difficulties arise from the application of the criteria set out in paragraphs 2 and 3, the Commission shall adopt implementing measures specifying those criteria.
Those measures, designed to amend non-essential elements of this Directive by supplementing it, shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 301(3).
8.   Where a Member State has more than one supervisory authority for the prudential supervision of insurance and reinsurance undertakings, such Member State shall take the necessary measures to ensure coordination between those authorities.
