Article 240
Subsidiaries of an insurance or reinsurance undertaking: end of derogations for a subsidiary
1.   The rules provided for in Articles 238 and 239 shall cease to apply where:
(a)
the condition referred to in Article 236(a) is no longer complied with;
(b)
the condition referred to in Article 236(b) is no longer complied with and the group does not restore compliance with this condition in an appropriate period of time;
(c)
the conditions referred to in Article 236(c) and (d) are no longer complied with.
In the case referred to in point (a) of the first subparagraph, where the group supervisor decides, after consulting the college of supervisors, no longer to include the subsidiary in the group supervision it carries out, it shall immediately inform the supervisory authority concerned and the parent undertaking.
For the purposes of Article 236(b), (c) and (d), the parent undertaking shall be responsible for ensuring that the conditions are complied with on an ongoing basis. In the event of non-compliance, it shall inform the group supervisor and the supervisor of the subsidiary concerned without delay. The parent undertaking shall present a plan to restore compliance within an appropriate period of time.
Without prejudice to the third subparagraph, the group supervisor shall verify at least annually, on its own initiative, that the conditions referred to in Article 236(b), (c) and (d) continue to be complied with. The group supervisor shall also perform such verification upon request from the supervisory authority concerned, where the latter has significant concerns related to the ongoing compliance with those conditions.
Where the verification performed identifies weaknesses, the group supervisor shall require the parent undertaking to present a plan to restore compliance within an appropriate period of time.
Where, after consulting the college of supervisors, the group supervisor determines that the plan referred to in the third or fifth subparagraph is insufficient or subsequently that it is not being implemented within the agreed period of time, the group supervisor shall conclude that the conditions referred to in Article 236(b), (c) and (d) are no longer complied with and it shall immediately inform the supervisory authority concerned.
2.   The regime provided for in Articles 238 and 239 shall be applicable again where the parent undertaking submits a new application and obtains a favourable decision in accordance with the procedure set out in Article 237.
