Article 112
General provisions for the approval of full and partial internal models
1.   Member States shall ensure that insurance or reinsurance undertakings may calculate the Solvency Capital Requirement using a full or partial internal model as approved by the supervisory authorities.
2.   Insurance and reinsurance undertakings may use partial internal models for the calculation of one or more of the following:
(a)
one or more risk modules, or sub-modules, of the Basic Solvency Capital Requirement, as set out in Articles 104 and 105;
(b)
the capital requirement for operational risk as set out in Article 107;
(c)
the adjustment referred to in Article 108.
In addition, partial modelling may be applied to the whole business of insurance and reinsurance undertakings, or only to one or more major business units.
3.   In any application for approval, insurance and reinsurance undertakings shall submit, as a minimum, documentary evidence that the internal model fulfils the requirements set out in Articles 120 to 125.
Where the application for that approval relates to a partial internal model, the requirements set out in Articles 120 to 125 shall be adapted to take account of the limited scope of the application of the model.
4.   The supervisory authorities shall decide on the application within six months from the receipt of the complete application.
5.   Supervisory authorities shall give approval to the application only if they are satisfied that the systems of the insurance or reinsurance undertaking for identifying, measuring, monitoring, managing and reporting risk are adequate and in particular, that the internal model fulfils the requirements referred to in paragraph 3.
6.   A decision by the supervisory authorities to reject the application for the use of an internal model shall state the reasons on which it is based.
7.   After having received approval from supervisory authorities to use an internal model, insurance and reinsurance undertakings may, by means of a decision stating the reasons, be required to provide supervisory authorities with an estimate of the Solvency Capital Requirement determined in accordance with the standard formula, as set out in Subsection 2.
