Article 36
Supervisory review process
1.   Member States shall ensure that the supervisory authorities review and evaluate the strategies, processes and reporting procedures which are established by the insurance and reinsurance undertakings to comply with the laws, regulations and administrative provisions adopted pursuant to this Directive.
That review and evaluation shall comprise the assessment of the qualitative requirements relating to the system of governance, the assessment of the risks which the undertakings concerned face or may face and the assessment of the ability of those undertakings to assess those risks taking into account the environment in which the undertakings are operating.
2.   The supervisory authorities shall in particular review and evaluate compliance with the following:
(a)
the system of governance, including the own-risk and solvency assessment, as set out in Chapter IV, Section 2;
(b)
the technical provisions as set out in Chapter VI, Section 2;
(c)
the capital requirements as set out in Chapter VI, Sections 4 and 5;
(d)
the investment rules as set out in Chapter VI, Section 6;
(e)
the quality and quantity of own funds as set out in Chapter VI, Section 3;
(f)
where the insurance or reinsurance undertaking uses a full or partial internal model, on-going compliance with the requirements for full and partial internal models set out in Chapter VI, Section 4, Subsection 3.
3.   The supervisory authorities shall have in place appropriate monitoring tools that enable them to identify deteriorating financial conditions in an insurance or reinsurance undertaking and to monitor how that deterioration is remedied.
4.   The supervisory authorities shall assess the adequacy of the methods and practices of the insurance and reinsurance undertakings designed to identify possible events or future changes in economic conditions that could have adverse effects on the overall financial standing of the undertaking concerned.
The supervisory authorities shall assess the ability of the undertakings to withstand those possible events or future changes in economic conditions.
5.   The supervisory authorities shall have the necessary powers to require insurance and reinsurance undertakings to remedy weaknesses or deficiencies identified in the supervisory review process.
6.   The reviews, evaluations and assessments referred to in paragraphs 1, 2 and 4 shall be conducted regularly.
The supervisory authorities shall establish the minimum frequency and the scope of those reviews, evaluations and assessments having regard to the nature, scale and complexity of the activities of the insurance or reinsurance undertaking concerned.
