Article 239
Subsidiaries of an insurance or reinsurance undertaking: non-compliance with the Solvency and Minimum Capital Requirements
1.   In the event of non-compliance with the Solvency Capital Requirement and without prejudice to Article 138, the supervisory authority having authorised the subsidiary shall, without delay, forward to the college of supervisors the recovery plan submitted by the subsidiary in order to achieve, within six months from the observation of non-compliance with the Solvency Capital Requirement, the reestablishment of the level of eligible own funds or the reduction of its risk profile to ensure compliance with the Solvency Capital Requirement.
The college of supervisors shall do everything within its power to reach an agreement on the proposal of the supervisory authority regarding the approval of the recovery plan within four months from the date on which non-compliance with the Solvency Capital Requirement was first observed.
In the absence of such agreement, the supervisory authority having authorised the subsidiary shall decide whether the recovery plan should be approved, taking due account of the views and reservations of the other supervisory authorities within the college of supervisors.
2.   Where the supervisory authority having authorised the subsidiary identifies, in accordance with Article 136, deteriorating financial conditions, it shall notify the college of supervisors without delay of the proposed measures to be taken. Save in emergency situations, the measures to be taken shall be discussed within the college of supervisors.
The college of supervisors shall do everything within its power to reach an agreement on the proposed measures to be taken within one month of notification.
In the absence of such agreement, the supervisory authority having authorised the subsidiary shall decide whether the proposed measures should be approved, taking due account of the views and reservations of the other supervisory authorities within the college of supervisors.
3.   In the event of non-compliance with the Minimum Capital Requirement and without prejudice to Article 139, the supervisory authority having authorised the subsidiary shall, without delay, forward to the college of supervisors the short-term finance scheme submitted by the subsidiary in order to achieve, within three months from the date on which non-compliance with the Minimum Capital Requirement was first observed, the reestablishment of the level of eligible own funds covering the Minimum Capital Requirement or the reduction of its risk profile to ensure compliance with the Minimum Capital Requirement. The college of supervisors shall also be informed of any measures taken to enforce the Minimum Capital Requirement at the level of the subsidiary.
