Article 303
Amendments to Directive 2003/41/EC
Directive 2003/41/EC shall be amended as follows:
1.
Article 17(2) is replaced by the following:
‘2.   For the purposes of calculating the minimum amount of additional assets, the rules laid down in Articles 17a to 17d shall apply.’.
2.
The following articles are inserted:
‘Article 17a
Available solvency margin
1.   Each Member State shall require of every institution referred to in Article 17(1) which is located in its territory an adequate available solvency margin in respect of its entire business at all times which is at least equal to the requirements in this Directive.
2.   The available solvency margin shall consist of the assets of the institution free of any foreseeable liabilities, less any intangible items, including:
(a)
the paid-up share capital or, in the case of an institution taking the form of a mutual undertaking, the effective initial fund plus any accounts of the members of the mutual undertaking which fulfil the following criteria:
(i)
the memorandum and articles of association must stipulate that payments may be made from those accounts to members of the mutual undertaking only in so far as this does not cause the available solvency margin to fall below the required level or, after the dissolution of the undertaking, where all the undertaking's other debts have been settled;
(ii)
the memorandum and articles of association must stipulate, with respect to any payments referred to in point (i) for reasons other than the individual termination of membership in the mutual undertaking, that the competent authorities must be notified at least one month in advance and can prohibit the payment within that period; and
(iii)
the relevant provisions of the memorandum and articles of association may be amended only after the competent authorities have declared that they have no objection to the amendment, without prejudice to the criteria stated in points (i) and (ii);
(b)
reserves (statutory and free) not corresponding to underwriting liabilities;
(c)
the profit or loss brought forward after deduction of dividends to be paid; and
(d)
in so far as authorised under national law, profit reserves appearing in the balance sheet where they may be used to cover any losses which may arise and where they have not been made available for distribution to members and beneficiaries.
The available solvency margin shall be reduced by the amount of own shares directly held by the institution.
3.   Member States may provide that the available solvency margin may also comprise:
(a)
cumulative preferential share capital and subordinated loan capital up to 50 % of the lesser of the available solvency margin and the required solvency margin, no more than 25 % of which shall consist of subordinated loans with a fixed maturity, or fixed-term cumulative preferential share capital, provided that binding agreements exist under which, in the event of the bankruptcy or liquidation of the institution, the subordinated loan capital or preferential share capital ranks after the claims of all other creditors and is not to be repaid until all other debts outstanding at the time have been settled;
(b)
securities with no specified maturity date and other instruments, including cumulative preferential shares other than those referred to in point (a), to a maximum of 50 % of the available solvency margin, or the required solvency margin, whichever the lesser, for the total of such securities, and the subordinated loan capital referred to in point (a) provided they fulfil the following conditions:
(i)
they must not be repaid on the initiative of the bearer or without the prior consent of the competent authority;
(ii)
the contract of issue must enable the institution to defer the payment of interest on the loan;
(iii)
the lender’s claims on the institution must rank entirely after those of all non-subordinated creditors;
(iv)
the documents governing the issue of the securities must provide for the loss-absorption capacity of the debt and unpaid interest, while enabling the institution to continue its business; and
(v)
only fully paid-up amounts must be taken into account.
For the purposes of point (a), subordinated loan capital shall also fulfil the following conditions:
(i)
only fully paid-up funds shall be taken into account;
(ii)
for loans with a fixed maturity, the original maturity shall be at least five years. No later than one year before the repayment date, the institution shall submit to the competent authorities for their approval a plan showing how the available solvency margin will be kept at or brought to the required level at maturity, unless the extent to which the loan may rank as a component of the available solvency margin is gradually reduced during at least the five years before the repayment date. The competent authorities may authorise the early repayment of such loans provided application is made by the issuing institution and its available solvency margin will not fall below the required level;
(iii)
loans the maturity of which is not fixed shall be repayable only subject to five years’ notice unless the loans are no longer considered as a component of the available solvency margin or unless the prior consent of the competent authorities is specifically required for early repayment. In the latter event the institution shall notify the competent authorities at least six months before the date of the proposed repayment, specifying the available solvency margin and the required solvency margin both before and after that repayment. The competent authorities shall authorise repayment only where the institution’s available solvency margin will not fall below the required level;
(iv)
the loan agreement shall not include any clause providing that in specified circumstances, other than the winding-up of the institution, the debt will become repayable before the agreed repayment dates; and
(v)
the loan agreement may be amended only after the competent authorities have declared that they have no objection to the amendment.
4.   Upon application, with supporting evidence, by the institution to the competent authority of the home Member State and with the agreement of that competent authority, the available solvency margin may also comprise:
(a)
where Zillmerising is not practised or where, if practised, it is less than the loading for acquisition costs included in the premium, the difference between a non-Zillmerised or partially Zillmerised mathematical provision and a mathematical provision Zillmerised at a rate equal to the loading for acquisition costs included in the premium;
(b)
any hidden net reserves arising out of the valuation of assets, in so far as such hidden net reserves are not of an exceptional nature;
(c)
one half of the unpaid share capital or initial fund, once the paid-up part amounts to 25 % of that share capital or fund, up to 50 % of the available or required solvency margin, whichever is the lesser.
The figure referred to in point (a) shall not exceed 3,5 % of the sum of the differences between the relevant capital sums of life assurance and occupational retirement provision activities and the mathematical provisions for all policies for which Zillmerising is possible. The difference shall be reduced by the amount of any undepreciated acquisition costs entered as an asset.
5.   The Commission may adopt implementing measures relating to paragraphs 2 to 4 in order to take account of developments that justify a technical adjustment of the elements eligible for the available solvency margin.
Those measures, designed to amend non-essential elements of this Directive by supplementing it, shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 21b.
Article 17b
Required solvency margin
1.   Subject to Article 17c, the required solvency margin shall be determined as laid down in paragraphs 2 to 6 according to the liabilities underwritten.
2.   The required solvency margin shall be equal to the sum of the following results:
(a)
the first result:
a 4 % fraction of the mathematical provisions relating to direct business and reinsurance acceptances gross of reinsurance cessions shall be multiplied by the ratio, which shall not be less than 85 %, for the previous financial year, of the mathematical provisions net of reinsurance cessions to the gross total mathematical provisions;
(b)
the second result:
for policies on which the capital at risk is not a negative figure, a 0,3 % fraction of such capital underwritten by the institution shall be multiplied by the ratio, which shall not be less than 50 %, for the previous financial year, of the total capital at risk retained as the institution’s liability after reinsurance cessions and retrocessions to the total capital at risk gross of reinsurance.
For temporary assurances on death of a maximum term of three years, that fraction shall be 0,1 %. For such assurance of a term of more than three years but not more than five years, that fraction shall be 0,15 %.
3.   For supplementary insurances referred to in Article 2(3)(a)(iii) of Directive 2009/138/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 November 2009 on the taking-up and pursuit of the business of Insurance and Reinsurance (Solvency II) (*1) the required solvency margin shall be equal to the required solvency margin for institutions as laid down in Article 17d.
4.   For capital redemption operations referred to in Article 2(3)(b)(ii) of Directive 2009/138/EC, the required solvency margin shall be equal to a 4 % fraction of the mathematical provisions calculated in compliance with paragraph 2(a).
5.   For operations referred to in Article 2(3)(b)(i) of Directive 2009/138/EC, the required solvency margin shall be equal to 1 % of their assets.
6.   For assurances covered by Article 2(3)(a)(i) and (ii) of Directive 2009/138/EC linked to investment funds and for the operations referred to in Article 2(3)(b)(iii), (iv) and (v) of Directive 2009/138/EC, the required solvency margin shall be equal to the sum of the following:
(a)
in so far as the institution bears an investment risk, a 4 % fraction of the technical provisions, calculated in compliance with paragraph 2(a);
(b)
in so far as the institution bears no investment risk but the allocation to cover management expenses is fixed for a period exceeding five years, a 1 % fraction of the technical provisions, calculated in compliance with paragraph 2(a);
(c)
in so far as the institution bears no investment risk and the allocation to cover management expenses is not fixed for a period exceeding five years, an amount equivalent to 25 % of the net administrative expenses of the previous financial year pertaining to such business;
(d)
in so far as the institution covers a death risk, a 0,3 % fraction of the capital at risk calculated in compliance with paragraph 2(b).
Article 17c
Guarantee fund
1.   Member States may provide that one third of the required solvency margin as specified in Article 17b shall constitute the guarantee fund. That fund shall comprise the items listed in Article 17a(2) and (3) and, subject to the agreement of the competent authority of the home Member State, in Article 17a(4)(b).
2.   The guarantee fund shall not be less than EUR 3 million. Any Member State may provide for a 25 % reduction of the minimum guarantee fund in the case of mutual and mutual-type undertakings.
Article 17d
Required solvency margin for the purpose of Article 17b(3)
1.   The required solvency margin shall be determined on the basis either of the annual amount of premiums or contributions, or of the average burden of claims for the past three financial years.
2.   The amount of the required solvency margin shall be equal to the higher of the two results as set out in paragraphs 3 and 4.
3.   The premium basis shall be calculated using the higher of gross written premiums or contributions as calculated below, and gross earned premiums or contributions.
The premiums or contributions (inclusive of charges ancillary to premiums or contributions) due in respect of direct business in the previous financial year shall be aggregated.
To that sum there shall be added the amount of premiums accepted for all reinsurance in the previous financial year.
From that sum there shall then be deducted the total amount of premiums or contributions cancelled in the previous financial year, as well as the total amount of taxes and levies pertaining to the premiums or contributions entering into the aggregate.
The amount so obtained shall be divided into two portions, the first extending up to EUR 50 million, the second comprising the excess; 18 % of the first portion and 16 % of the second shall be added together.
The sum so obtained shall be multiplied by the ratio existing in respect of the sum of the previous three financial years between the amount of claims remaining to be borne by the institution after deduction of amounts recoverable under reinsurance and the gross amount of claims. That ratio shall be no less than 50 %.
4.   The claims basis shall be calculated, as follows:
The amounts of claims paid in respect of direct business (without any deduction of claims borne by reinsurers and retrocessionaires) in the periods specified in paragraph 1 shall be aggregated.
To that sum there shall be added the amount of claims paid in respect of reinsurances or retrocessions accepted during the same periods and the amount of provisions for claims outstanding established at the end of the previous financial year both for direct business and for reinsurance acceptances.
From that sum there shall be deducted the amount of recoveries effected during the periods specified in paragraph 1.
From the sum then remaining, there shall be deducted the amount of provisions for claims outstanding established at the commencement of the second financial year preceding the last financial year for which there are accounts, both for direct business and for reinsurance acceptances.
One third of the amount so obtained shall be divided into two portions, the first extending up to EUR 35 million and the second comprising the excess; 26 % of the first portion and 23 % of the second, shall be added together.
The sum so obtained shall be multiplied by the ratio existing in respect of the sum of the previous three financial years between the amount of claims remaining to be borne by the institution after deduction of amounts recoverable under reinsurance and the gross amount of claims. That ratio shall be no less than 50 %.
5.   Where the required solvency margin as calculated in paragraphs 2 to 4 is lower than the required solvency margin of the preceding year, the required solvency margin shall be at least equal to the required solvency margin of the preceding year, multiplied by the ratio of the amount of the technical provisions for claims outstanding at the end of the previous financial year and the amount of the technical provisions for claims outstanding at the beginning of the previous financial year. In those calculations technical provisions shall be calculated net of reinsurance but the ratio may be no higher than 1.

(*1)  
                                             OJ L 335, 17.12.2009, p. 1
                                             ’."
                        
3.
The following articles are inserted:
‘Article 21a
Review of the amount of the guarantee fund
1.   The amount in euro as laid down in Article 17c(2) shall be reviewed annually starting on 31 October 2012, in order to take account of changes in the Harmonised Indices of Consumer Prices of all Member States as published by Eurostat.
That amount shall be adapted automatically, by increasing the base amount in euro by the percentage change in that index over the period between 31 December 2009 and the review date and rounded up to a multiple of EUR 100 000.
If the percentage change since the last adaptation is less than 5 %, no adaptation shall take place.
2.   The Commission shall inform the European Parliament and the Council annually of the review and the adapted amount referred to in paragraph 1.
Article 21b
Committee procedure
1.   The Commission shall be assisted by the European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Committee established by Commission Decision 2004/9/EC (*2).
2.   Where reference is made to this paragraph, Article 5a(1) to (4) and Article 7 of Decision 1999/468/EC shall apply, having regard to the provisions of Article 8 thereof.

(*2)  
                                             OJ L 3, 7.1.2004, p. 34
                                             ’."
                        
