Article 237
Subsidiaries of an insurance or reinsurance undertaking: decision on the application
1.   In the case of applications for permission to be subject to the rules laid down in Articles 238 and 239, the supervisory authorities concerned shall work together within the college of supervisors, in full consultation, to decide whether or not to grant the permission sought and to determine the other terms and conditions, if any, to which such permission should be subject.
An application as referred to in the first subparagraph shall be submitted only to the supervisory authority having authorised the subsidiary. That supervisory authority shall inform and forward the complete application to the other supervisory authorities within the college of supervisors without delay.
2.   The supervisory authorities concerned shall do everything within their power to reach a joint decision on the application within three months from the date of receipt of the complete application by all supervisory authorities within the college of supervisors.
3.   During the period referred to in paragraph 2, in the case of diverging views concerning the approval of the application referred to in paragraph 1, the group supervisor or any of the other supervisory authorities concerned may consult CEIOPS. Where CEIOPS is being consulted, all supervisory authorities concerned shall be informed and the period referred to in paragraph 2 shall be extended by one month.
Where CEIOPS has been consulted, the supervisory authorities concerned shall duly consider such advice before taking their joint decision.
4.   The supervisory authority having authorised the subsidiary shall provide to the applicant the joint decision referred to in paragraphs 2 and 3, shall state the full reasons and shall, where CEIOPS has been consulted, contain an explanation of any significant deviation from the position adopted by CEIOPS. The joint decision shall be recognised as determinative and shall be applied by the supervisory authorities concerned.
5.   In the absence of a joint decision of the supervisory authorities concerned within the periods set out in paragraphs 2 and 3, the group supervisor shall take its own decision with regard to the application.
In taking its decision, the group supervisor shall duly consider the following:
(a)
any views and reservations of the supervisory authorities concerned expressed during the applicable period;
(b)
any reservations of the other supervisory authorities within the college of supervisors expressed during the applicable period;
(c)
where CEIOPS has been consulted, its advice.
The decision shall state the full reasons and shall contain an explanation of any significant deviation from the reservations of the other supervisory authorities concerned and the advice of CEIOPS. The group supervisor shall provide the applicant and the other supervisory authorities concerned with a copy of the decision.
