Article 58
Assessment period
1.   The supervisory authorities shall, promptly and in any event within two working days following receipt of the notification required under Article 57(1), as well as following the possible subsequent receipt of the information referred to in paragraph 2, acknowledge receipt thereof in writing to the proposed acquirer.
The supervisory authorities shall have a maximum of 60 working days as from the date of the written acknowledgement of receipt of the notification and all documents required by the Member State to be attached to the notification on the basis of the list referred to in Article 59(4) (the assessment period), to carry out the assessment provided for in Article 59(1) (the assessment).
The supervisory authorities shall inform the proposed acquirer of the date of the expiry of the assessment period at the time of acknowledging receipt.
2.   The supervisory authorities may, during the assessment period, if necessary, and no later than on the fiftieth working day of the assessment period, request any further information that is necessary to complete the assessment. Such request shall be made in writing and shall specify the additional information needed.
For the period between the date of request for information by the supervisory authorities and the receipt of a response thereto by the proposed acquirer, the assessment period shall be interrupted. That interruption shall not exceed 20 working days. Any further requests by the supervisory authorities for completion or clarification of the information shall be at their discretion but shall not result in an interruption of the assessment period.
3.   The supervisory authorities may extend the interruption referred to in the second subparagraph of paragraph 2 up to 30 working days if the proposed acquirer is:
(a)
situated or regulated outside the Community; or
(b)
a natural or legal person not subject to supervision under this Directive, Council Directive 85/611/EEC of 20 December 1985 on the coordination of laws, regulations and administrative provisions relating to undertakings for collective investment in transferable securities (UCITS) (32), Directive 2004/39/EC, or Directive 2006/48/EC.
4.   If the supervisory authorities, upon completion of the assessment, decide to oppose the proposed acquisition, they shall, within two working days, and not exceeding the assessment period, inform the proposed acquirer in writing stating the reasons. Subject to national law, an appropriate statement of the reasons for the decision may be made accessible to the public at the request of the proposed acquirer. This shall not prevent a Member State from allowing the supervisory authority to make such disclosure in the absence of a request by the proposed acquirer.
5.   If the supervisory authorities do not oppose the proposed acquisition within the assessment period in writing, it shall be deemed to be approved.
6.   The supervisory authorities may fix a maximum period for concluding the proposed acquisition and extend it where appropriate.
7.   Member States shall not impose requirements for the notification to and approval by the supervisory authorities of direct or indirect acquisitions of voting rights or capital that are more stringent than those set out in this Directive.
8.   The Commission shall adopt implementing measures further specifying the adjustments of the criteria set out in Article 59(1), in order to take account of future developments and to ensure the uniform application of Articles 57 to 63.
Those measures, designed to amend non-essential elements of this Directive by supplementing it, shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 301(3).
