Article 231
Group internal model
1.   In the case of an application for permission to calculate the consolidated group Solvency Capital Requirement, as well as the Solvency Capital Requirement of insurance and reinsurance undertakings in the group, on the basis of an internal model, submitted by an insurance or reinsurance undertaking and its related undertakings, or jointly by the related undertakings of an insurance holding company, the supervisory authorities concerned shall cooperate to decide whether or not to grant that permission and to determine the terms and conditions, if any, to which such permission is subject.
An application as referred to in the first subparagraph shall be submitted to the group supervisor.
The group supervisor shall inform the other supervisory authorities concerned without delay.
2.   The supervisory authorities concerned shall do everything within their power to reach a joint decision on the application within six months from the date of receipt of the complete application by the group supervisor.
The group supervisor shall forward the complete application to the other supervisory authorities concerned without delay.
3.   During the period referred to in paragraph 2, the group supervisor and any of the other supervisory authorities concerned may consult CEIOPS. CEIOPS shall also be consulted where the participating undertaking so requests.
Where CEIOPS is being consulted, all the supervisory authorities concerned shall be informed and the period referred to in paragraph 2 shall be extended by two months.
4.   Where CEIOPS has not been consulted in accordance with the first subparagraph of paragraph 3, and in the absence of a joint decision of the supervisory authorities concerned within six months from the date of receipt of the complete application by the group supervisor, the group supervisor shall request CEIOPS, within a further two months, to deliver advice to all the supervisory authorities concerned. The group supervisor shall take a decision within three weeks of the transmission of that advice, taking full account thereof.
5.   Irrespective of whether CEIOPS has been consulted, the group supervisor’s decision shall state the full reasons and shall take into account the views expressed by the other supervisory authorities concerned.
The group supervisor shall provide the applicant and the other supervisory authorities concerned with the decision.
The supervisory authorities concerned shall comply with the decision.
6.   In the absence of a joint decision within the periods set out in paragraphs 2 and 3 respectively, the group supervisor shall make its own decision on the application.
In making its decision, the group supervisor shall duly take into account the following:
(a)
any views and reservations of the other supervisory authorities concerned expressed during the applicable period;
(b)
where CEIOPS has been consulted, its advice.
The decision shall state the full reasons and shall contain an explanation of any significant deviation from the positions adopted by CEIOPS.
The group supervisor shall transmit the decision to the applicant and the other supervisory authorities concerned.
That decision shall be recognised as determinative and applied by the supervisory authorities concerned.
7.   Where any of the supervisory authorities concerned considers that the risk profile of an insurance or reinsurance undertaking under its supervision deviates significantly from the assumptions underlying the internal model approved at group level, and as long as that undertaking has not properly addressed the concerns of the supervisory authority, that authority may, in accordance with Article 37, impose a capital add-on to the Solvency Capital Requirement of that insurance or reinsurance undertaking resulting from the application of such internal model.
In exceptional circumstances, where such capital add-on would not be appropriate, the supervisory authority may require the undertaking concerned to calculate its Solvency Capital Requirement on the basis of the standard formula referred to in Title I, Chapter VI, Section 4, Subsections 1 and 2. In accordance with Article 37(1)(a) and (c), the supervisory authority may impose a capital add-on to the Solvency Capital Requirement of that insurance or reinsurance undertaking resulting from the application of the standard formula.
The supervisory authority shall explain any decision referred to in the first and second subparagraphs to both the insurance or reinsurance undertaking and the group supervisor.
