Article 2
Methodology
1.   The methodology of the ESA 2010 referred to in point (a) of Article 1(2) is set out in Annex A.
2.   The Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 7, concerning amendments to the ESA 2010 methodology in order to specify and improve its content for the purpose of ensuring a harmonised interpretation or to ensure international comparability provided that they do not change its underlying concepts, do not require additional resources for producers within the European Statistical System for their implementation, and do not cause a change in own resources.
3.   In the event of doubt regarding the correct implementation of the ESA 2010 accounting rules, the Member State concerned shall request clarification from the Commission (Eurostat). The Commission (Eurostat) shall act promptly both in examining the request and in communicating its advice on the requested clarification to the Member State concerned and all other Member States.
4.   Member States shall carry out the calculation and allocation of financial intermediation services indirectly measured (FISIM) in national accounts in accordance with the methodology described in Annex A. The Commission shall be empowered to adopt before 17 September 2013 delegated acts in accordance with Article 7 laying down a revised methodology for the calculation and allocation of FISIM. In exercising its power pursuant to this paragraph, the Commission shall ensure that such delegated acts do not impose a significant additional administrative burden on the Member States or on the respondent units.
5.   Research and development expenditure shall be recorded, by Member States, as gross fixed capital formation. The Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 7 to ensure the reliability and comparability of the ESA 2010 data of the Member States on research and development. In exercising its power pursuant to this paragraph, the Commission shall ensure that such delegated acts do not impose a significant additional administrative burden on the Member States or on the respondent units.
