Article 14
Consultations, transparency and procedural safeguards
1.   In carrying out its tasks, in particular in the process of developing framework guidelines in accordance with Article 59 of Regulation (EU) 2019/943 or Article 6 of Regulation (EC) No 715/2009, and in the process of proposing amendments of network codes under Article 60 of Regulation (EU) 2019/943 or Article 7 of Regulation (EC) No 715/2009 ACER shall, extensively consult at an early stage market participants, transmission system operators, consumers, end-users and, where relevant, competition authorities, without prejudice to their respective competence, in an open and transparent manner, in particular when its tasks concern transmission system operators.
2.   ACER shall ensure that the public and any interested parties are, where appropriate, given objective, reliable and easily accessible information, in particular with regard to the results of its work.
All documents and minutes of consultation meetings conducted during the development of framework guidelines in accordance with Article 59 of Regulation (EU) 2019/943 or Article 6 of Regulation (EC) No 715/2009, or during the amendment of network codes referred to in paragraph 1 shall be made public.
3.   Before adopting framework guidelines, or proposing amendments to network codes as referred to in paragraph 1, ACER shall indicate how the observations received during the consultation have been taken into account and shall provide reasons where those observations have not been followed.
4.   ACER shall make public, on its own website, at least the agenda, the background documents and, where appropriate, the minutes of the meetings of the Administrative Board, of the Board of Regulators and of the Board of Appeal.
5.   ACER shall adopt and publish adequate and proportionate rules of procedure in accordance with the procedure set out in point (t) of Article 19(1). Those rules shall include provisions which ensure a transparent and reasonable decision-making process guaranteeing fundamental procedural rights based on the rule of law, including the right to be heard, rules on access to files and the standards specified in paragraphs 6, 7 and 8.
6.   Before taking any individual decision as provided for in this Regulation, ACER shall inform any party concerned of its intention to adopt that decision, and shall set a time limit within which the party concerned may express its views on the matter, taking full account of the urgency, complexity and potential consequences of the matter.
7.   Individual decisions of ACER shall state the reasons on which they are based for the purpose of allowing an appeal on the merits.
8.   The parties concerned by individual decisions shall be informed of the legal remedies available under this Regulation.
