Article 35
Presentation of accounts and discharge
1.   ACER's accounting officer shall submit the provisional accounts for the financial year (year N) to the Commission's Accounting Officer and to the Court of Auditors by 1 March of the following financial year (year N + 1).
2.   ACER shall submit a report on the budgetary and financial management for year N to the European Parliament, the Council, the Commission and the Court of Auditors by 31 March of year N + 1.
By 31 March of year N + 1, the Commission's accounting officer shall submit the provisional accounts of ACER to the Court of Auditors. The Commission shall also submit the report on budgetary and financial management over the financial year to the European Parliament and to the Council.
3.   After receipt of the observations of the Court of Auditors on ACER's provisional accounts for year N in accordance with the provisions of Article 246 of the Financial Regulation, the accounting officer, acting on his or her own responsibility, shall draw up ACER's final accounts for that year. The Director shall submit them to the Administrative Board for an opinion.
4.   The Administrative Board shall deliver an opinion on ACER's final accounts for year N.
5.   ACER's accounting officer shall submit the final accounts for year N, accompanied by the opinion of the Administrative Board, by 1 July of year N + 1, to the European Parliament, the Council, the Commission and the Court of Auditors.
6.   The final accounts shall be published in the Official Journal of the European Union by 15 November of year N + 1.
7.   The Director shall submit a reply to the Court of Auditors' observations by 30 September of year N + 1. The Director shall also submit a copy of that reply to the Administrative Board and the Commission.
8.   The Director shall submit to the European Parliament, at the latter's request, any information necessary for the smooth application of the discharge procedure for year N in accordance with Article 109(3) of Delegated Regulation (EU) No 1271/2013.
9.   The European Parliament, following a recommendation by the Council, acting by qualified majority, shall, before 15 May of the year N + 2, grant a discharge to the Director for the implementation of the budget for the financial year N.
