Article 20
Annual and multi-annual programming
1.   Each year, the Director shall prepare a draft programming document containing annual and multi-annual programming, and shall submit the draft programming document to the Administrative Board and to the Board of Regulators.
The Administrative Board shall adopt the draft programming document after receipt of a favourable opinion of the Board of Regulators, and shall submit the draft programming document to the European Parliament, to the Council and to the Commission no later than 31 January.
The draft programming document shall be in accordance with the provisional draft estimate established in accordance with Article 33(1), (2) and (3).
The Administrative Board shall adopt the programming document, taking into account the opinion of the Commission, after receipt of a favourable opinion from the Board of Regulators, and after the Director has presented it to the European Parliament. The Administrative Board shall submit the programming document to the European Parliament, the Council and the Commission by 31 December.
The programming document shall be adopted without prejudice to the annual budgetary procedure and shall be made public.
The programming document shall become definitive after the final adoption of the general budget and, if necessary, shall be adjusted accordingly.
2.   The annual programming in the programming document shall comprise detailed objectives and expected results, including performance indicators. It shall also contain a description of the actions to be financed and an indication of the financial and human resources allocated to each action, including a reference to ACER's working groups tasked with contributing to the drafting of the respective documents, in accordance with the principles of activity-based budgeting and management. The annual programming shall be coherent with the multi-annual programming referred to in paragraph 4. It shall clearly indicate the tasks that have been added, changed or deleted in comparison with the previous financial year.
3.   The Administrative Board shall amend the adopted programming document where a new task is assigned to ACER.
Any substantial amendment to the programming document shall be adopted by the same procedure set out for the initial programming document. The Administrative Board may delegate the power to make non-substantial amendments to the programming document to the Director.
4.   The multi-annual programming in the programming document shall set out the overall strategic programming, including objectives, expected results and performance indicators. It shall also set out resource programming, including the multi-annual budget and staff.
The resource programming shall be updated annually. The strategic programming shall be updated where appropriate, in particular to address the outcome of the evaluation referred to in Article 45.
