Article 22
Functions of the Board of Regulators
1.   The Board of Regulators shall act by a two-thirds majority of the members present, with one vote for each member.
2.   The Board of Regulators shall adopt and publish its rules of procedure, which shall set out in greater detail the arrangements governing voting, in particular the conditions on the basis of which one member may act on behalf of another and also, where appropriate, the rules governing quorums. The rules of procedure may provide for specific working methods for the consideration of issues arising in the context of regional cooperation initiatives.
3.   When carrying out the tasks conferred upon it by this Regulation and without prejudice to its members acting on behalf of their respective regulatory authority, the Board of Regulators shall act independently and shall not seek or follow instructions from any government of a Member State, from the Commission, or from another public or private entity.
4.   The secretarial services of the Board of Regulators shall be provided by ACER.
5.   The Board of Regulators shall:
(a)
provide opinions and, where appropriate, comments on and amendments to the text of the Director's proposals for draft opinions, recommendations and decisions referred to in Article 3(1), Articles 4 to 8, Article 9(1) and (3), Article 10, point (c) of Article 11, Article 13, Article 15(4), and Articles 30 and 43 which are considered for adoption;
(b)
within its field of competence, provide guidance to the Director in the execution of his or her tasks, with the exception of ACER's tasks under Regulation (EU) No 1227/2011 and provide guidance to ACER's working groups established pursuant to Article 30;
(c)
provide an opinion to the Administrative Board on the candidate to be appointed as Director in accordance with point (a) of Article 19(1) and Article 23(2);
(d)
approve the programming document in accordance with Article 20(1);
(e)
approve the independent section on regulatory activities of the annual report, in accordance with point (k) of Article 19(1) and point (i) of Article 24(1);
(f)
provide an opinion to the Administrative Board on the rules of procedure under Article 14(5) and Article 30(3);
(g)
provide an opinion to the Administrative Board on the communication and dissemination plans referred to in Article 41;
(h)
provide an opinion to the Administrative Board on the rules of procedure for relations with third countries or international organisations referred to in Article 43.
6.   The European Parliament shall be informed of the draft agenda of upcoming meetings of the Board of Regulators at least two weeks in advance. Within two weeks of those meetings, the draft minutes shall be sent to the European Parliament. The European Parliament may invite, while fully respecting his or her independence, the Chair of the Board of Regulators or the Vice-Chair to make a statement before its competent committee and answer questions put by the members of that committee.
