Article 23
Director
1.   ACER shall be managed by its Director, who shall act in accordance with the guidance referred to in point (b) of Article 22(5) and, where provided for in this Regulation, the opinions of the Board of Regulators. Without prejudice to the respective roles of the Administrative Board and the Board of Regulators in relation to the tasks of the Director, the Director shall neither seek nor follow any instruction from any government, from the Union institutions, or from any other public or private entity or person. The Director shall be accountable to the Administrative Board with respect to administrative, budgetary and managerial matters, but remain fully independent concerning his or her tasks under point (c) of Article 24(1). The Director may attend the meetings of the Board of Regulators as an observer.
2.   The Director shall be appointed by the Administrative Board following a favourable opinion of the Board of Regulators, on the basis of merit as well as skills and experience relevant to the energy sector, from a list of at least three candidates proposed by the Commission, following an open and transparent selection procedure. Before appointment, the candidate selected by the Administrative Board shall make a statement before the competent committee of the European Parliament and answer questions put by its members. For the purpose of concluding the contract with the Director, ACER shall be represented by the Chair of the Administrative Board.
3.   The Director's term of office shall be five years. In the course of the nine months preceding the end of that period, the Commission shall undertake an assessment. In the assessment, the Commission shall examine in particular:
(a)
the performance of the Director;
(b)
ACER's duties and requirements in the following years.
4.   The Administrative Board, acting on a proposal from the Commission, after consulting the Board of Regulators and giving the utmost consideration to the assessment and opinion of the Board of Regulators, and only where justified on the basis of the duties and requirements of ACER, may extend the term of office of the Director once by no more than five years. A Director whose term of office has been extended shall not participate in another selection procedure for the same post at the end of the extended period.
5.   The Administrative Board shall inform the European Parliament of its intention to extend the Director's term of office. Within one month before the extension of his or her term of office, the Director may be invited to make a statement before the competent committee of the European Parliament and to answer questions put by the members of that committee.
6.   If his or her term of office is not extended, the Director shall remain in office until the appointment of his or her successor.
7.   The Director may be removed from office only upon a decision of the Administrative Board, after having obtained a favourable opinion of the Board of Regulators. The Administrative Board shall reach that decision on the basis of a two-thirds majority of its members.
8.   The European Parliament and the Council may call upon the Director to submit a report on the performance of his or her duties. The European Parliament may also invite the Director to make a statement before its competent committee and answer questions put by the members of that committee.
