Whereas:
(1)
Regulation (EC) No 713/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council (4), which established the Agency for the Cooperation of Energy Regulators (ACER), has been substantially amended (5). Since further amendments are to be made, that Regulation should be recast in the interest of clarity.
(2)
The creation of ACER has manifestly improved coordination between regulatory authorities on cross-border issues. Since its creation, ACER has received new important tasks concerning the monitoring of wholesale markets under Regulation (EU) No 1227/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council (6) and concerning the fields of cross-border energy infrastructure under Regulation (EU) No 347/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council (7) and security of gas supply under Regulation (EU) 2017/1938 of the European Parliament and of the Council (8).
(3)
It is anticipated that the need for coordination of national regulatory actions will increase further in the coming years. The Union's energy system is in the middle of its most profound change in decades. More market integration and the change towards more variable electricity production require increased efforts to coordinate national energy policies with neighbours and increased efforts to use the opportunities of cross-border electricity trade.
(4)
Experience with the implementation of the internal market has shown that uncoordinated national action can lead to severe problems for the market, in particular in closely interconnected areas where the decisions of Member States often have a tangible impact on their neighbours. To achieve the positive effects of the internal electricity market for consumer welfare, the security of supply and decarbonisation, Member States, in particular their independent regulatory authorities, are required to cooperate on regulatory measures which have cross-border effects.
(5)
Fragmented national state interventions in energy markets constitute an increasing risk to the proper functioning of cross-border electricity markets. ACER should therefore be given a role in the development of a coordinated European resource adequacy assessment, in close cooperation with the European Network of Transmission System Operators for Electricity (ENTSO for Electricity), in order to avoid the problems of fragmented national assessments which follow different uncoordinated methods and do not sufficiently take into account the situation in neighbouring countries. ACER should also supervise the technical parameters developed by the ENTSO for Electricity for the efficient participation of cross-border capacities and other technical features of capacity mechanisms.
(6)
Despite significant progress in integrating and interconnecting the internal electricity market, some Member States or regions remain isolated or not sufficiently interconnected, in particular insular Member States and Member States located on the periphery of the Union. In its work, ACER should take account of the specific situation of those Member States or regions as appropriate.
(7)
The security of the electricity supply requires a coordinated approach to preparing for unexpected supply crises. ACER should therefore coordinate national actions related to risk preparedness, in accordance with Regulation (EU) 2019/941 of the European Parliament and of the Council (9).
(8)
Because of the close interconnection of the Union electricity grid and the increasing need to cooperate with neighbouring countries to maintain grid stability and integrate large volumes of renewable energy, regional coordination centres will play an important role for the coordination of transmission system operators. ACER should guarantee regulatory oversight of the regional coordination centres where necessary.
(9)
As large parts of new electricity generation capacity will be connected at local level, distribution system operators are to play an important role when it comes to operating the Union electricity system in a flexible and efficient manner.
(10)
Member States should cooperate closely, eliminating obstacles to cross-border exchanges of electricity and natural gas with a view to achieving the objectives of the Union energy policy. ACER was established to fill the regulatory gap at Union level and to contribute towards the effective functioning of the internal markets for electricity and natural gas. ACER enables regulatory authorities to enhance their cooperation at Union level and participate, on a mutual basis, in the exercise of Union-related functions.
(11)
ACER should ensure that regulatory functions performed by the regulatory authorities in accordance with Directive (EU) 2019/944 of the European Parliament and of the Council (10) and Directive 2009/73/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (11) are properly coordinated and, where necessary, completed at Union level. To that end, it is necessary to guarantee the independence of ACER from electricity and gas producers, transmission system operators and distribution system operators, whether public or private, and consumers and to ensure the conformity of its actions with Union law, its technical and regulatory capacities and its transparency, amenability to democratic control, including accountability to the European Parliament, and efficiency.
(12)
ACER should monitor regional cooperation between transmission system operators in the electricity and gas sectors as well as the execution of the tasks of the ENTSO for Electricity, and the European Network of Transmission System Operators for Gas (ENTSO for Gas). ACER should also monitor the implementation of the tasks of other entities with regulated functions of Union-wide dimension, such as energy exchanges. ACER's involvement is essential in order to ensure that the cooperation between transmission system operators and the operation of other entities with Union-wide functions proceed in an efficient and transparent way for the benefit of the internal markets for electricity and natural gas.
(13)
The regulatory authorities should coordinate among themselves when carrying out their tasks to ensure that the ENTSO for Electricity, the European Entity for Distribution System Operators (the ‘EU DSO entity’), and the regional coordination centres comply with their obligations under the regulatory framework of the internal energy market and with ACER's decisions. With the expansion of the operational responsibilities of the ENTSO for Electricity, the EU DSO entity and the regional coordination centres, it is necessary to enhance the oversight of such entities operating at regional or Union-wide level. The procedure established in this Regulation ensures that ACER supports the regulatory authorities when performing those functions as referred to in Directive (EU) 2019/944.
(14)
In order to ensure that ACER has the information it needs to carry out its tasks, ACER should be able to request and to receive that information from the regulatory authorities, the ENTSO for Electricity, the ENTSO for Gas, the regional coordination centres, the EU DSO entity, the transmission system operators and the nominated electricity market operators.
(15)
ACER should monitor, in cooperation with the Commission, the Member States and relevant national authorities, the internal markets for electricity and natural gas and inform the European Parliament, the Commission and the national authorities of its findings where appropriate. ACER's monitoring tasks should not duplicate or hamper monitoring by the Commission or by national authorities, in particular national competition authorities.
(16)
ACER provides an integrated framework which enables the regulatory authorities to participate and cooperate. That framework facilitates the uniform application of the legislation on the internal markets for electricity and natural gas throughout the Union. As regards situations concerning more than one Member State, ACER has been granted the power to adopt individual decisions. That power should, under clearly specified conditions, cover technical and regulatory issues which require regional coordination, in particular those concerning the implementation of network codes and guidelines, cooperation within regional coordination centres, the regulatory decisions necessary to effectively monitor wholesale energy market integrity and transparency, decisions concerning electricity and natural gas infrastructure that connects or that might connect at least two Member States and, as a last resort, exemptions from the internal market rules for new electricity interconnectors and new gas infrastructure located in more than one Member State.
(17)
Revision of the network codes and guidelines covers amendments which are necessary to take into account the evolution of the market without substantially changing those network codes and guidelines or creating new competences of ACER.
(18)
ACER has an important role in developing framework guidelines which are non-binding by nature. Network codes should be in line with those framework guidelines. It is also considered to be appropriate for ACER, and consistent with its purpose, to have a role in reviewing and amending draft network codes to ensure that they are in line with the framework guidelines and provide for the necessary degree of harmonisation, before it submits them to the Commission for adoption.
(19)
With the adoption of a set of network codes and guidelines which provide for the stepwise implementation and further refinement of common regional and Union-wide rules, ACER's role with regard to monitoring and contributing to the implementation of the network codes and guidelines has increased. The effective monitoring of network codes and guidelines is a key function of ACER and is crucial to the implementation of internal market rules.
(20)
During the implementation of network codes and guidelines, it has emerged that it would be useful to streamline the procedures for the regulatory approval of regional or Union-wide terms and conditions or methodologies that are developed under the network codes and guidelines by submitting them directly to ACER to allow regulatory authorities represented in the Board of Regulators to decide on such terms and conditions or methodologies.
(21)
Since the stepwise harmonisation of the Union energy markets regularly involves finding regional solutions as an interim step, and many terms and conditions and methodologies need to be approved by a limited number of regulatory authorities for a specific region, it is appropriate to reflect the regional dimension of the internal market in this Regulation and to provide for appropriate governance mechanisms. Decisions on proposals for joint regional terms and conditions or methodologies should therefore be taken by the competent regulatory authorities of the region concerned, unless those decisions have a tangible impact on the internal energy market.
(22)
Since ACER has an overview of the regulatory authorities, it should have an advisory role with respect to the Commission, other Union institutions and regulatory authorities as regards the issues relating to the purpose for which it was established. It should also be required to inform the Commission where it finds that the cooperation between transmission system operators does not produce the necessary results or that a regulatory authority whose decision infringes the network codes and guidelines has not implemented an opinion, recommendation or decision of ACER appropriately.
(23)
ACER should also be able to make recommendations to assist regulatory authorities and market participants in sharing good practices.
(24)
The ENTSO for Electricity, the ENTSO for Gas, the EU DSO entity, transmission system operators, the regional coordination centres and the nominated electricity market operators should give the utmost consideration to the opinions and recommendations of ACER that are addressed to them pursuant to this Regulation.
(25)
ACER should consult interested parties, where appropriate, and provide them with a reasonable opportunity to comment on proposed measures, such as network codes and rules.
(26)
ACER should contribute to the implementation of the guidelines on trans-European energy networks as laid down in Regulation (EU) No 347/2013, in particular when providing its opinion on the non-binding Union-wide 10-year network development plans (Union-wide network development plans).
(27)
ACER should contribute to the efforts of enhancing energy security.
(28)
ACER's activities should be consistent with the objectives and targets of the Energy Union which has five closely related and mutually reinforcing dimensions, including decarbonisation, as outlined in Article 1 of Regulation (EU) 2018/1999 of the European Parliament and of the Council (12).
(29)
In accordance with the principle of subsidiarity, ACER should adopt individual decisions only in clearly defined circumstances, on issues that are strictly related to the purposes for which ACER was established.
(30)
In order to ensure that ACER's framework is efficient and coherent with other decentralised agencies, the rules governing ACER should be aligned with the Common Approach agreed between the European Parliament, the Council of the EU and the European Commission on decentralised agencies (13) (Common Approach). However, to the extent necessary, ACER's structure should be adapted to meet the specific needs of energy regulation. In particular, the specific role of the regulatory authorities needs to be taken fully into account and their independence guaranteed.
(31)
Additional changes to this Regulation may be envisaged in the future in order to bring the Regulation fully in line with the Common Approach. Based on the current needs of energy regulation, deviations from the Common Approach are necessary. The Commission should carry out an evaluation to assess ACER's performance in relation to ACER's objectives, mandate and tasks and, following that evaluation, the Commission should be able to propose amendments to this Regulation.
(32)
The Administrative Board should have the necessary powers to establish the budget, check its implementation, draw up internal rules, adopt financial regulations and appoint a Director. A rotation system should be used for the renewal of the members of the Administrative Board who are appointed by the Council so as to ensure a balanced participation of Member States over time. The Administrative Board should act independently and objectively in the public interest and should not seek or follow political instructions.
(33)
ACER should have the necessary powers to perform its regulatory functions in an efficient, transparent, reasoned and, above all, independent manner. ACER's independence from electricity and gas producers and from transmission system operators and distribution system operators as well as other private and corporate interests is not only a key principle of good governance but also a fundamental condition to ensure market confidence. Without prejudice to its members' acting on behalf of their respective national authorities, the Board of Regulators should therefore act independently from any market interest, should avoid conflicts of interests and should not seek or follow instructions or accept recommendations from a government of a Member State, from Union institutions or another public or private entity or person. The decisions of the Board of Regulators should, at the same time, comply with Union law concerning energy, such as the internal energy market, the environment and competition. The Board of Regulators should report its opinions, recommendations and decisions to the Union institutions.
(34)
Where ACER has decision-making powers, interested parties should, for reasons of procedural economy, be granted a right of appeal to a Board of Appeal, which should be part of ACER, but independent from its administrative and regulatory structure. In order to guarantee its functioning and full independence, the Board of Appeal should have a separate budget line in the budget of ACER. In the interest of continuity, the appointment or renewal of the members of the Board of Appeal should allow for the partial replacement of the members of the Board of Appeal. The decisions of the Board of Appeal are subject to appeal before the Court of Justice of the European Union (the Court of Justice).
(35)
ACER should exercise its decision-making powers in line with the principles of fair, transparent and reasonable decision-making. ACER's procedural rules should be laid down in its rules of procedures.
(36)
The Director should be responsible for drafting and adopting documents containing opinions, recommendations and decisions. Certain opinions, recommendations and decisions referred to in point (a) of Article 22(5) and Article 24(2) should require the favourable opinion of the Board of Regulators before they are adopted. The Board of Regulators should be able to provide opinions on, and, where appropriate, comments on and amendments to the Director's text proposals, which the Director should take into account. Where the Director deviates from or rejects the comments and amendments submitted by the Board of Regulators, the Director should provide a duly justified written reasoning to facilitate a constructive dialogue. If the Board of Regulators does not give a favourable opinion on a re-submitted text, the Director should have the possibility of revising the text further in line with the amendments and comments proposed by the Board of Regulators, in order to obtain their favourable opinion. The Director should have the possibility of withdrawing submitted draft opinions, recommendations and decisions where the Director disagrees with the amendments submitted by the Board of Regulators and issuing a new text following certain procedures referred to in point (a) of Article 22(5) and Article 24(2). The Director should have the possibility of seeking the favourable opinion of the Board of Regulators on a new or revised draft text at any stage of the procedure.
(37)
ACER should be properly resourced to carry out its tasks. ACER should be mainly financed from the general budget of the Union. Fees improve ACER's funding and should cover its costs with regard to services provided to market participants or entities acting on their behalf enabling them to report data pursuant to Article 8 of Regulation (EU) No 1227/2011 in an efficient, effective and safe manner. The resources currently pooled by regulatory authorities for their cooperation at Union level should continue to be available to ACER. The Union budgetary procedure should remain applicable as far as any subsidies chargeable to the general budget of the Union are concerned. Moreover, the auditing of accounts should be undertaken by an independent external auditor in accordance with Article 107 of Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 1271/2013 (14).
(38)
ACER's budget should be assessed by the budgetary authority on an ongoing basis, with reference to ACER's workload, to ACER's performance and to ACER's objectives of working towards an internal energy market and contributing to energy security for the benefit of consumers in the Union. The budgetary authority should ensure that the best standards of efficiency are met.
(39)
The Translation Centre for the Bodies of the European Union (the ‘Translation Centre’) should provide translation for the Union Agencies. If ACER experiences particular difficulties with the services of the Translation Centre, ACER should have the possibility of invoking the recourse mechanism established in Council Regulation (EC) No 2965/94 (15), which could, ultimately, result in recourse to other service providers under the auspices of the Translation Centre.
(40)
ACER should have highly professional staff. In particular, it should benefit from the competence and experience of staff seconded by the regulatory authorities, the Commission and the Member States. The Staff Regulations of Officials of the European Communities (‘the Staff Regulations’) and the Conditions of employment of other servants of the European Communities (‘the Conditions of Employment’), laid down in Council Regulation (EEC, Euratom, ECSC) No 259/68 (16) and the rules adopted jointly by the Union institutions for the purpose of applying those regulations should apply to ACER's staff. The Administrative Board, in agreement with the Commission, should adopt appropriate implementing rules.
(41)
It should be possible for the regulatory work of the Director and the Board of Regulators pursuant to this Regulation to be supported by working groups.
(42)
ACER should apply the general rules regarding public access to documents held by Union bodies. The Administrative Board should establish the practical measures to protect commercially sensitive data and personal data.
(43)
Through the cooperation of regulatory authorities within ACER, it is evident that majority decisions are a key pre-requisite to achieving progress on matters concerning the internal energy market which have significant economic effects in various Member States. Regulatory authorities should therefore continue to vote on the basis of a two-thirds majority within the Board of Regulators. ACER should be accountable to the European Parliament, to the Council and to the Commission, where appropriate.
(44)
Countries which are not members of the Union should be able to participate in ACER's work in accordance with appropriate agreements to be concluded by the Union.
(45)
Since the objectives of this Regulation, namely the cooperation of regulatory authorities at Union level and their participation in the exercise of Union-related functions, cannot be sufficiently achieved by the Member States and can therefore be better achieved at Union level, the Union may adopt measures, in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity as set out in Article 5 of the Treaty on European Union (TEU). In accordance with the principle of proportionality, as set out in that Article, this Regulation does not go beyond what is necessary in order to achieve those objectives.
(46)
ACER's seat is situated in Ljubljana, as provided by Decision 2009/913/EU (17). ACER's seat is the centre of its activities and its statutory functions.
(47)
ACER's host Member State should provide the best possible conditions to ensure the smooth and efficient functioning of ACER, including multilingual, European-oriented schooling and appropriate transport connections. The Seat Agreement between the Government of the Republic of Slovenia and ACER covering those requirements together with its implementing arrangements, was concluded on 26 November 2010 and entered into force on 10 January 2011,
HAVE ADOPTED THIS REGULATION:

Chapter I


Objectives and tasks

