Article 8
Monitoring organisations
1.   A monitoring organisation shall:
(a)
maintain and regularly evaluate a due diligence system as set out in Article 6 and grant operators the right to use it;
(b)
verify the proper use of its due diligence system by such operators;
(c)
take appropriate action in the event of failure by an operator to properly use its due diligence system, including notification of competent authorities in the event of significant or repeated failure by the operator.
2.   An organisation may apply for recognition as a monitoring organisation if it complies with the following requirements:
(a)
it has legal personality and is legally established within the Union;
(b)
it has appropriate expertise and the capacity to exercise the functions referred to in paragraph 1; and
(c)
it ensures the absence of any conflict of interest in carrying out its functions.
3.   The Commission, after consulting the Member State(s) concerned, shall recognise as a monitoring organisation an applicant that fulfils the requirements set out in paragraph 2.
The decision to grant recognition to a monitoring organisation shall be communicated by the Commission to the competent authorities of all the Member States.
4.   The competent authorities shall carry out checks at regular intervals to verify that the monitoring organisations operating within the competent authorities’ jurisdiction continue to fulfil the functions laid down in paragraph 1 and comply with the requirements laid down in paragraph 2. Checks may also be carried out when the competent authority of the Member State is in possession of relevant information, including substantiated concerns from third parties or when it has detected shortcomings in the implementation by operators of the due diligence system established by a monitoring organisation. A report of the checks shall be made available in accordance with Directive 2003/4/EC.
5.   If a competent authority determines that a monitoring organisation either no longer fulfils the functions laid down in paragraph 1 or no longer complies with the requirements laid down in paragraph 2, it shall without delay inform the Commission.
6.   The Commission shall withdraw recognition of a monitoring organisation when, in particular on the basis of the information provided pursuant to paragraph 5, it has determined that the monitoring organisation no longer fulfils the functions laid down in paragraph 1 or the requirements laid down in paragraph 2. Before withdrawing recognition of a monitoring organisation, the Commission shall inform the Member States concerned.
The decision to withdraw recognition of a monitoring organisation shall be communicated by the Commission to the competent authorities of all the Member States.
7.   In order to supplement the procedural rules with regard to the recognition and withdrawal of recognition of monitoring organisations and, if experience so requires, to amend them, the Commission may adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 290 TFEU, while ensuring that the recognition and withdrawal of recognition are performed in a fair and transparent manner.
For the delegated acts referred to in this paragraph the procedures set out in Articles 15, 16 and 17 shall apply. Those acts shall be adopted by 3 March 2012.
8.   Detailed rules concerning the frequency and the nature of the checks referred to in paragraph 4, necessary to ensure the effective oversight of monitoring organisations and the uniform implementation of that paragraph, shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure referred to in Article 18(2). Those rules shall be adopted by 3 June 2012.
