Article 28
Restricted procedure
1.   In restricted procedures, any economic operator may submit a request to participate in response to a call for competition containing the information set out in Annex V parts B or C as the case may be by providing the information for qualitative selection that is requested by the contracting authority.
The minimum time limit for receipt of requests to participate shall be 30 days from the date on which the contract notice or, where a prior information notice is used as a means of calling for competition, the invitation to confirm interest was sent.
2.   Only those economic operators invited to do so by the contracting authority following its assessment of the information provided may submit a tender. Contracting authorities may limit the number of suitable candidates to be invited to participate in the procedure in accordance with Article 65.
The minimum time limit for the receipt of tenders shall be 30 days from the date on which the invitation to tender was sent.
3.   Where contracting authorities have published a prior information notice which was not itself used as a means of calling for competition, the minimum time limit for the receipt of tenders as laid down in the second subparagraph of paragraph 2 of this Article may be shortened to 10 days, provided that all of the following conditions are fulfilled:
(a)
the prior information notice included all the information required in section I of part B of Annex V, in so far as that information was available at the time the prior information notice was published;
(b)
the prior information notice was sent for publication between 35 days and 12 months before the date on which the contract notice was sent.
4.   Member States may provide that all or specific categories of sub-central contracting authorities may set the time limit for the receipt of tenders by mutual agreement between the contracting authority and the selected candidates, provided that all selected candidates have the same time to prepare and submit their tenders. In the absence of agreement on the time limit for the receipt of tenders, the time limit shall be at least 10 days from the date on which the invitation to tender was sent.
5.   The time limit for receipt of tenders provided for in paragraph 2 of this Article may be reduced by five days where the contracting authority accepts that tenders may be submitted by electronic means in conformity with Article 22(1), (5) and (6).
6.   Where a state of urgency duly substantiated by the contracting authorities renders impracticable the time limits laid down in this Article, they may fix:
(a)
a time limit for the receipt of requests to participate which shall not be less than 15 days from the date on which the contract notice was sent;
(b)
a time limit for the receipt of tenders which shall not be less than 10 days from the date on which the invitation to tender was sent.
