Article 64
Official lists of approved economic operators and certification by bodies established under public or private law
1.   Member States may establish or maintain either official lists of approved contractors, suppliers or service providers or provide for a certification by certification bodies complying with European certification standards within the meaning of Annex VII.
They shall inform the Commission and the other Member States of the address of the certification body or the body responsible for the official lists, to which applications shall be sent.
2.   Member States shall adapt the conditions for registration on the official lists referred to in paragraph 1 and for the issue of certificates by certification bodies to the provisions of this subsection.
Member States shall also adapt those conditions to Article 63 as regards applications for registration submitted by economic operators belonging to a group and claiming resources made available to them by the other companies in the group. In such cases, those operators shall prove to the authority establishing the official list that they will have those resources at their disposal throughout the period of validity of the certificate attesting to their registration on the official list and that throughout the same period those companies continue to fulfil the qualitative selection requirements encompassed by the official list or certificate on which operators rely for their registration.
3.   Economic operators registered on the official lists or having a certificate may, for each contract, submit to the contracting authority a certificate of registration issued by the competent authority or the certificate issued by the competent certification body.
Those certificates shall state the references which enabled those economic operators to be registered on the official list or to obtain certification and the classification given in that list.
4.   Certified registration on official lists by the competent bodies or a certificate issued by the certification body shall constitute a presumption of suitability with regard to requirements for qualitative selection encompassed by the official list or certificate.
5.   Information that can be deduced from registration on official lists or certification shall not be questioned without justification. With regard to the payment of social security contributions and taxes, an additional certificate may be required of any registered economic operator whenever a contract is to be awarded.
The contracting authorities of other Member States shall apply paragraph 3 and the first subparagraph of this paragraph only in favour of economic operators established in the Member State holding the official list.
6.   The requirements of proof for the criteria for qualitative selection encompassed by the official list or certificate shall comply with Article 60 and, where appropriate, Article 62. For any registration of economic operators of other Member States on an official list or for their certification, no further proof or statements shall be required other than those requested of national economic operators.
Economic operators may request at any time their registration on an official list or the issuance of a certificate. They shall be informed within a reasonably short period of time of the decision of the authority drawing up the official list or of the competent certification body.
7.   Economic operators from other Member States shall not be obliged to undergo such registration or certification in order to participate in a public contract. The contracting authorities shall recognise equivalent certificates from bodies established in other Member States. They shall also accept other equivalent means of proof.
8.   Upon request, Member States shall make available to other Member States any information relating to the documents produced as evidence that the economic operators fulfil the requirements to be registered on the official list of approved economic operators or as evidence that economic operators from another Member State possess an equivalent certification.

Subsection 2



Reduction of numbers of candidates, tenders and solutions


