Article 48
Prior information notices
1.   Contracting authorities may make known their intentions of planned procurements through the publication of a prior information notice. Those notices shall contain the information set out in Annex V part B section I. They shall be published either by the Publications Office of the European Union or by the contracting authorities on their buyer profiles in accordance with point 2(b) of Annex VIII. Where the prior information notice is published by the contracting authorities on their buyer profile, they shall send a notice of the publication on their buyer profile to the Publications Office of the European Union in accordance with Annex VIII. Those notices shall contain the information set out in Annex V part A.
2.   For restricted procedures and competitive procedures with negotiation, sub-central contracting authorities may use a prior information notice as a call for competition pursuant to Article 26(5), provided that the notice fulfils all of the following conditions:
(a)
it refers specifically to the supplies, works or services that will be the subject of the contract to be awarded;
(b)
it indicates that the contract will be awarded by restricted procedure or competitive procedure with negotiation without further publication of a call for competition and invites interested economic operators to express their interest;
(c)
it contains, in addition to the information set out in Annex V part B section I, the information set out in Annex V part B section II;
(d)
it has been sent for publication between 35 days and 12 months prior to the date on which the invitation referred to in Article 54(1) is sent.
Such notices shall not be published on a buyer profile. However, the additional publication at national level pursuant to Article 52, if any, may be made on a buyer profile.
The period covered by the prior information notice shall be a maximum of 12 months from the date the notice is transmitted for publication. However, in the case of public contracts for social and other specific services, the prior information notice referred to in point (b) of Article 75(1) may cover a period which is longer than 12 months.
