Article 6
Revision of the thresholds and of the list of central government authorities
1.   Every two years from 30 June 2013, the Commission shall verify that the thresholds set out in points (a), (b) and (c) of Article 4 correspond to the thresholds established in the World Trade Organisation Agreement on Government Procurement (GPA) and shall, where necessary, revise them in accordance with this Article.
In accordance with the calculation method set out in the GPA, the Commission shall calculate the value of these thresholds on the basis of the average daily value of the euro in terms of the special drawing rights (SDRs), over a period of 24 months terminating on 31 August preceding the revision with effect from 1 January. The value of the thresholds thus revised shall, where necessary, be rounded down to the nearest thousand euros so as to ensure that the thresholds in force provided for by the GPA, expressed in SDRs, are observed.
2.   When carrying out the revision pursuant to paragraph 1 of this Article, the Commission shall, in addition, revise:
(a)
the threshold established in point (a) of the first paragraph of Article 13 by aligning it with the revised threshold applying to public works contracts;
(b)
the threshold established in point (b) of the first paragraph of Article 13 by aligning it with the revised threshold applying to public service contracts awarded by sub-central contracting authorities.
3.   Every two years from 1 January 2014, the Commission shall determine the values, in the national currencies of the Member States, whose currency is not the euro, of the thresholds referred to in points (a), (b) and (c) of Article 4, revised pursuant to paragraph 1 of this Article.
At the same time, the Commission shall determine the value, in the national currencies of the Member States, whose currency is not the euro, of the threshold referred to in point (d) of Article 4.
In accordance with the calculation method set out in the GPA, the determination of such values shall be based on the average daily values of those currencies corresponding to the applicable threshold expressed in euros over the 24 months terminating on 31 August preceding the revision with effect from 1 January.
4.   The Commission shall publish the revised thresholds referred to in paragraph 1, their corresponding values in the national currencies referred to in the first subparagraph of paragraph 3, and the value determined in accordance with the second subparagraph of paragraph 3 in the Official Journal of the European Union at the beginning of the month of November following their revision.
5.   The Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 87 to adapt the methodology set out in the second subparagraph of paragraph 1 of this Article to any change in the methodology provided in the GPA for the revision of the thresholds referred to in points (a), (b) and (c) of Article 4 and for the determination of the corresponding values in the national currencies of the Member States, whose currency is not the euro, as referred to in paragraph 3 of this Article.
The Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 87 to revise the thresholds referred to in points (a), (b) and (c) of Article 4 pursuant to paragraph 1 of this Article and to revise the thresholds referred to in points (a) and (b) of the first paragraph of Article 13 pursuant to paragraph 2 of this Article.
6.   Where it is necessary to revise the thresholds referred to in points (a), (b) and (c) of Article 4 and the thresholds referred to in points (a) and (b) of the first paragraph of Article 13 and time constraints prevent the use of the procedure set in Article 87 and therefore imperative grounds of urgency so require, the procedure provided for in Article 88 shall apply to delegated acts adopted pursuant to the second subparagraph of paragraph 5 of this Article.
7.   The Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 87 to amend Annex I, in order to update the list of contracting authorities following notifications from Member States, where such amendments prove necessary to correctly identify contracting authorities.
