Article 9
1.   Managers of qualifying venture capital funds shall identify and avoid conflicts of interest and, where they cannot be avoided, manage and monitor and, in accordance with paragraph 4, disclose promptly, those conflicts of interest in order to prevent them from adversely affecting the interests of the qualifying venture capital funds and the investors therein and to ensure that the qualifying venture capital funds they manage are fairly treated.
2.   Managers of qualifying venture capital funds shall identify in particular those conflicts of interest that may arise between:
(a)
managers of qualifying venture capital funds, persons who effectively conduct the business of those managers, employees of, or any person who directly or indirectly controls or is controlled by, those managers, and the qualifying venture capital fund managed by those managers, or the investors therein;
(b)
the qualifying venture capital fund or the investors therein, and another qualifying venture capital fund managed by the same manager, or the investors therein;
(c)
the qualifying venture capital fund or the investors therein, and a collective investment undertaking or UCITS managed by the same manager, or the investors therein.
3.   Managers of qualifying venture capital funds shall maintain and operate effective organisational and administrative arrangements in order to comply with the requirements set out in paragraphs 1 and 2.
4.   Disclosures of conflicts of interest as referred to in paragraph 1 shall be provided, where organisational arrangements made by a manager of a qualifying venture capital fund to identify, prevent, manage and monitor conflicts of interest are not sufficient to ensure, with reasonable confidence, that risks of damage to investors’ interests will be prevented. A manager of a qualifying venture capital fund shall disclose in clear terms the general nature or sources of conflicts of interest to the investors before undertaking business on their behalf.
5.   The Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 25 specifying:
(a)
the types of conflicts of interest referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article;
(b)
the steps that managers of qualifying venture capital funds must take, in terms of structures and organisational and administrative procedures in order to identify, prevent, manage, monitor and disclose conflicts of interest.
