Whereas:
(1)
Venture capital provides finance to undertakings that are generally very small, that are in the initial stages of their corporate existence and that display a strong potential for growth and expansion. In addition, venture capital funds provide undertakings with valuable expertise and knowledge, business contacts, brand equity and strategic advice. By providing finance and advice to those undertakings, venture capital funds stimulate economic growth, contribute to the creation of jobs and capital mobilisation, foster the establishment and expansion of innovative undertakings, increase their investment in research and development and foster entrepreneurship, innovation and competitiveness in line with the objectives of the Europe 2020 Strategy set out in the Commission Communication of 3 March 2010 entitled ‘Europe 2020: A strategy for delivering smart, sustainable and inclusive growth’ (Europe 2020) and in the context of the long-term challenges of the Member States, such as those identified in the report of the European Strategy and Policy Analysis System of March 2012 entitled ‘Global Trends 2030 — citizens in an interconnected and polycentric world’.
(2)
It is necessary to lay down a common framework of rules regarding the use of the designation ‘EuVECA’ for qualifying venture capital funds, in particular the composition of the portfolio of funds that operate under that designation, their eligible investment targets, the investment tools they may employ and the categories of investors that are eligible to invest in them by uniform rules in the Union. In the absence of such a common framework, there is a risk that Member States take diverging measures at national level having a direct negative impact on, and creating obstacles to, the proper functioning of the internal market, since venture capital funds that wish to operate across the Union would be subject to different rules in different Member States. Moreover, diverging quality requirements on portfolio composition, investment targets and eligible investors could lead to different levels of investor protection and generate confusion as to the investment proposition associated with qualifying venture capital funds. Investors should, furthermore, be able to compare the investment propositions of different qualifying venture capital funds. It is necessary to remove significant obstacles to cross-border fundraising by qualifying venture capital funds, to avoid distortions of competition between those funds, and to prevent any further likely obstacles to trade and significant distortions of competition from arising in the future. Consequently, the appropriate legal basis for this Regulation is Article 114 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU), as interpreted by consistent case law of the Court of Justice of the European Union.
(3)
It is necessary to adopt a Regulation establishing uniform rules applicable to qualifying venture capital funds and imposing corresponding obligations on their managers in all Member States that wish to raise capital across the Union using the designation ‘EuVECA’. Those requirements should ensure the confidence of investors that wish to invest in venture capital funds.
(4)
Defining the quality requirements for the use of the designation ‘EuVECA’ in the form of a regulation ensures that those requirements are directly applicable to the managers of collective investment undertakings that raise funds using that designation. This also ensures uniform conditions for the use of the designation by preventing diverging national requirements as a result of the transposition of a directive. Managers of collective investment undertakings that use the designation should follow the same rules across the Union, which will also boost the confidence of investors. This Regulation reduces regulatory complexity and the managers’ costs of compliance with often divergent national rules governing venture capital funds, especially for those managers that want to raise capital on a cross-border basis. It also contributes to eliminating competitive distortions.
(5)
As stated in the Commission Communication of 7 December 2011, entitled ‘An action plan to improve access to finance for SMEs’, the Commission was to complete its examination of tax obstacles to cross-border venture capital investments in 2012, with a view to presenting solutions in 2013 aimed at eliminating the obstacles while at the same time preventing tax avoidance and tax evasion.
(6)
It should be possible for a qualifying venture capital fund to be externally or internally managed. Where a qualifying venture capital fund is internally managed, the fund is also the manager and should therefore comply with all relevant requirements for managers under this Regulation and be registered in accordance with this Regulation. A qualifying venture capital fund which is internally managed should not, however, be permitted to be the external manager of other collective investment undertakings or of undertakings for collective investment in transferable securities (UCITS).
(7)
In order to clarify the relationship between this Regulation and other rules on collective investment undertakings and their managers, it is necessary to establish that this Regulation only apply to managers of collective investment undertakings, other than UCITS falling within the scope of Directive 2009/65/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 July 2009 on the coordination of laws, regulations and administrative provisions relating to undertakings for collective investment in transferable securities (UCITS) (4), which are established in the Union and are registered with the competent authority in their home Member State in accordance with Directive 2011/61/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 8 June 2011 on Alternative Investment Fund Managers (5), provided that those managers manage portfolios of qualifying venture capital funds. However, external managers of qualifying venture capital funds that are registered in accordance with this Regulation should also be allowed to manage UCITS, subject to authorisation under Directive 2009/65/EC.
(8)
Furthermore, this Regulation applies only to managers of those collective investment undertakings with assets under management that in total do not exceed the threshold referred to in point (b) of Article 3(2) of Directive 2011/61/EU. The calculation of the threshold for the purposes of this Regulation is the same as for the threshold referred to in point (b) of Article 3(2) of Directive 2011/61/EU.
(9)
However, venture capital fund managers registered in accordance with this Regulation with assets under management that in total subsequently exceed the threshold referred to in point (b) of Article 3(2) of Directive 2011/61/EU, and that therefore become subject to authorisation with the competent authorities of their home Member State in accordance with Article 6 of that Directive, should be able to continue to use the designation ‘EuVECA’ in relation to the marketing of qualifying venture capital funds in the Union, provided that they comply with the requirements laid down in that Directive and that they continue to comply with certain requirements for the use of the designation ‘EuVECA’ specified in this Regulation at all times in relation to the qualifying venture capital funds. This applies both to existing qualifying venture capital funds and to qualifying venture capital funds established after exceeding the threshold.
(10)
Where managers of collective investment undertakings do not wish to use the designation ‘EuVECA’, this Regulation should not apply. In these cases, existing national rules and general Union rules should continue to apply.
(11)
This Regulation should establish uniform rules on the nature of qualifying venture capital funds, in particular on qualifying portfolio undertakings into which the qualifying venture capital funds are to be permitted to invest and the investment instruments to be used. This is necessary so that a clear demarcation line can be drawn between a qualifying venture capital fund and alternative investment funds that engage in other, less specialised, investment strategies, for example buyouts or speculative real estate investments, which this Regulation is not seeking to promote.
(12)
In line with the aim of precisely circumscribing the collective investment undertakings which are to be covered by this Regulation and in order to ensure a focus on providing capital to small undertakings in the initial stages of their corporate existence, qualifying venture capital funds should be deemed to be funds that intend to invest at least 70 % of their aggregate capital contributions and uncalled committed capital in such undertakings. Qualifying venture capital funds should not be permitted to invest more than 30 % of their aggregate capital contributions and uncalled committed capital in assets other than qualifying investments. This means that whereas the 30 % threshold should be the maximum limit for non-qualifying investments at all times, the 70 % threshold should be reserved for qualifying investments during the life of the qualifying venture capital fund. Those thresholds should be calculated on the basis of amounts investible after deduction of all relevant costs and holdings of cash and cash equivalents. This Regulation should set out the details necessary for the calculation of the thresholds.
(13)
The purpose of this Regulation is to enhance the growth and innovation of small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) in the Union. Investments in qualifying portfolio undertakings established in third countries can bring more capital to qualifying venture capital funds and thereby benefit SMEs in the Union. However, under no circumstances should this Regulation benefit investments made in portfolio undertakings established in third countries characterised by a lack of appropriate cooperation arrangements between the competent authorities of the home Member State of the manager of a qualifying venture capital fund and with each other Member State in which units or shares of the qualifying venture capital fund are intended to be marketed or by a lack of effective exchange of information in tax matters.
(14)
A qualifying venture capital fund should, as a first step, be established in the Union in order to be entitled to use the designation ‘EuVECA’ as established by this Regulation. The Commission should, within two years of the date of application of this Regulation, review the limitation on the use of the designation ‘EuVECA’ to funds established in the Union, taking into account experience of applying the Commission Recommendation regarding measures intended to encourage third countries to apply minimum standards of good governance in tax matters.
(15)
Managers of qualifying venture capital funds should be able to attract additional capital commitments during the life of that fund. Such additional capital commitments during the life of the qualifying venture capital fund should be taken into account when the next investment in assets other than qualifying assets is contemplated. Additional capital commitments should be permitted in accordance with criteria and subject to conditions set out in the qualifying venture capital fund’s rules or instruments of incorporation.
(16)
Qualifying investments should be in the form of equity or quasi-equity instruments. Quasi-equity instruments comprise a type of financing instrument, which is a combination of equity and debt, where the return on the instrument is linked to the profit or loss of the qualifying portfolio undertaking, and where the repayment of the instrument in the event of default is not fully secured. Such instruments include a variety of financing instruments such as subordinated loans, silent participations, participating loans, profit participating rights, convertible bonds and bonds with warrants. As a possible complement to — but not a substitute for — equity and quasi-equity instruments, secured or unsecured loans, such as bridge financing, granted by the qualifying venture capital fund to a qualifying portfolio undertaking in which the qualifying venture capital fund already holds qualifying investments, should be permitted, provided that no more than 30 % of the aggregate capital contributions and uncalled committed capital in the qualifying venture capital fund is used for such loans. Furthermore, to reflect existing business practices in the venture capital market, a qualifying venture capital fund should be allowed to buy existing shares of a qualifying portfolio undertaking from existing shareholders of that undertaking. Also, for the purposes of ensuring the widest possible opportunities for fundraising, investments into other qualifying venture capital funds should be permitted. To prevent dilution of the investments into qualifying portfolio undertakings, qualifying venture capital funds should only be permitted to invest into other qualifying venture capital funds, provided that those qualifying venture capital funds have not themselves invested more than 10 % of their aggregate capital contributions and uncalled committed capital in other qualifying venture capital funds.
(17)
The core activities of venture capital funds are providing finance to SMEs through primary investments. Venture capital funds should neither participate in systemically important banking activities outside of the usual prudential regulatory framework (so-called ‘shadow banking’) nor follow typical private equity strategies, such as leveraged buyouts.
(18)
In line with Europe 2020, this Regulation aims to promote venture capital investments into innovative SMEs anchored in the real economy. Credit institutions, investment firms, insurance undertakings, financial holding companies and mixed-activity holding companies should therefore be excluded from the definition of qualifying portfolio undertakings under this Regulation.
(19)
In order to put in place an essential safeguard that differentiates qualifying venture capital funds under this Regulation from the broader category of alternative investment funds which trade in issued securities on secondary markets, it is necessary to lay down rules so that qualifying venture capital funds make investments primarily in directly issued instruments.
(20)
In order to allow managers of qualifying venture capital funds a certain degree of flexibility in the investment and liquidity management of their qualifying venture capital funds, trading, such as in shares or participations in non-qualifying portfolio undertakings or acquisitions of non-qualifying investments, should be permitted up to a maximum threshold of 30 % of aggregate capital contributions and uncalled capital.
(21)
In order to ensure that the designation ‘EuVECA’ is reliable and easily recognisable for investors across the Union, only managers of qualifying venture capital funds which comply with the uniform quality criteria as set out in this Regulation should be eligible to use the designation ‘EuVECA’ when marketing qualifying venture capital funds across the Union.
(22)
In order to ensure that qualifying venture capital funds have a distinct and identifiable profile which is suited to their purpose, there should be uniform rules on the composition of the portfolio and on the investment techniques which are permitted for such funds.
(23)
In order to ensure that qualifying venture capital funds do not contribute to the development of systemic risks, and that such funds concentrate, in their investment activities, on supporting qualifying portfolio undertakings, the use of leverage at the level of the fund should not be permitted. Managers of qualifying venture capital funds should only be permitted to borrow, issue debt obligations or provide guarantees, at the level of the qualifying venture capital fund, provided that such borrowings, debt obligations or guarantees are covered by uncalled commitments and thus do not increase the exposure of the fund beyond the level of its committed capital. Cash advances from investors of qualifying venture capital funds that are fully covered by capital commitments from those investors do not increase the exposure of the qualifying venture capital fund and should therefore be allowed. Also, in order to permit the fund to cover extraordinary liquidity needs that might arise between a call of committed capital from investors and the actual reception of the capital in its accounts, short-term borrowing should be allowed provided that the amount of such borrowing does not exceed the fund’s uncalled committed capital.
(24)
In order to ensure that qualifying venture capital funds are only marketed to investors who have the experience, knowledge and expertise to make their own investment decisions and properly assess the risks that those funds carry, and in order to maintain investor confidence and trust in qualifying venture capital funds, certain specific safeguards should be laid down. Therefore, qualifying venture capital funds should only be marketed to investors who are professional clients or who can be treated as professional clients under Directive 2004/39/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 April 2004 on markets in financial instruments (6). However, in order to have a sufficiently broad investor base for investment into qualifying venture capital funds it is also desirable that certain other investors have access to qualifying venture capital funds, including high net worth individuals. For those other investors, however, specific safeguards should be laid down in order to ensure that qualifying venture capital funds are only marketed to investors that have the appropriate profile for making such investments. These safeguards exclude marketing through the use of periodic savings plans. Furthermore, investments made by executives, directors or employees involved in the management of a manager of a qualifying venture capital fund should be possible when investing in the qualifying venture capital fund that they manage, as such individuals are knowledgeable enough to participate in venture capital investments.
(25)
To ensure that only managers of qualifying venture capital funds that fulfil uniform quality criteria as regards their behaviour in the market use the designation ‘EuVECA’, there should be rules on the conduct of business and the relationship of those managers with their investors. For the same reason, uniform conditions concerning the handling of conflicts of interest by those managers should be established. Those rules and conditions should also require the managers to have the necessary organisational and administrative arrangements in place to ensure a proper handling of conflicts of interest.
(26)
Where a manager of a qualifying venture capital fund intends to delegate functions to third parties, the manager’s liability towards the venture capital fund and the investors therein should not be affected by such delegation of functions to a third party. Moreover, the manager should not delegate functions to the extent that, in essence, it can no longer be considered to be a manager of a qualifying venture capital fund and has become a letter-box entity. The manager should remain responsible for the proper performance of delegated functions and compliance with this Regulation at all time. The delegation of functions should not undermine the effectiveness of supervision of the manager, and, in particular, should not prevent the manager from acting, or the fund from being managed, in the best interests of its investors.
(27)
In order to ensure the integrity of the designation ‘EuVECA’ quality criteria as regards the organisation of a manager of a qualifying venture capital fund should be established. Therefore, uniform, proportionate requirements for the need to maintain adequate technical and human resources should be laid down.
(28)
In order to ensure the proper management of qualifying venture capital funds and the ability of their managers to cover potential risks arising from their activities, uniform, proportionate requirements for managers of qualifying venture capital funds to maintain sufficient own funds should be laid down. The amount of such own funds should be sufficient to ensure the continuity and proper management of qualifying venture capital funds.
(29)
It is necessary for the purpose of investor protection to ensure that the assets of the qualifying venture capital fund are properly evaluated. The rules or instruments of incorporation of qualifying venture capital funds should therefore contain provisions on the valuation of assets. This should ensure the integrity and transparency of the valuation.
(30)
In order to ensure that managers of qualifying venture capital funds which make use of the designation ‘EuVECA’ give sufficient account of their activities, uniform rules on annual reports should be established.
(31)
It is necessary, for the purposes of ensuring the integrity of the designation ‘EuVECA’ in the eyes of investors, that it is only used by managers of qualifying venture capital funds that are fully transparent as to their investment policy and their investment targets. Uniform rules on disclosure requirements that are incumbent on such managers in relation to their investors should therefore be laid down. In particular, there should be pre-contractual disclosure obligations related to the investment strategy and objectives of the qualifying venture capital funds, the investment instruments which are used, information on costs and associated charges, and the risk/reward profile of the investment proposed by a qualifying fund. In view of achieving a high degree of transparency, such disclosure requirements should also include information on how the remuneration of the managers is calculated.
(32)
In order to ensure effective supervision of the uniform requirements contained in this Regulation, the competent authority of the home Member State should supervise compliance of managers of qualifying venture capital funds with the uniform requirements set out in this Regulation. To that end, the managers that intend to market their qualifying funds under the designation ‘EuVECA’ should inform the competent authority of their home Member State of that intention. The competent authority should register the manager if all necessary information has been provided and if suitable arrangements to comply with the requirements of this Regulation are in place. Such registration should be valid across the entire Union.
(33)
In order to facilitate the efficient cross-border marketing of qualifying venture capital funds, registration of the manager should be effected as quickly as possible.
(34)
While safeguards are included in this Regulation to ascertain that funds are properly used, supervisory authorities should be vigilant in ensuring that those safeguards are complied with.
(35)
In order to ensure effective supervision of compliance with the uniform criteria laid down in this Regulation, rules on the circumstances under which information supplied to the competent authority in the home Member State needs to be updated should be established.
(36)
For the effective supervision of the requirements laid down in this Regulation, a process for cross-border notifications between the competent supervisory authorities, to be triggered by the registration of a manager of a qualifying venture capital fund in its home Member State should also be established.
(37)
In order to maintain transparent conditions for the marketing of qualifying venture capital funds across the Union, the European Supervisory Authority (European Securities and Markets Authority) (‘ESMA’), established by Regulation (EU) No 1095/2010 of the European Parliament and of the Council (7), should be entrusted with maintaining a central database listing managers of qualifying venture capital funds and the qualifying venture capital funds that they manage that are registered in accordance with this Regulation.
(38)
Where the competent authority of the host Member State has clear and demonstrable grounds for believing that a manager of a qualifying venture capital fund is acting in breach of this Regulation within its territory, it should promptly inform the competent authority of the home Member State, which should take appropriate measures.
(39)
If a manager of a qualifying venture capital fund persists in acting in a manner that is clearly in conflict with this Regulation despite the measures taken by the competent authority of the home Member State or because the competent authority of the home Member State fails to take measures within a reasonable timeframe, the competent authority of the host Member State should be able, after informing the competent authority of the home Member State, to take all the appropriate measures in order to protect investors, including the possibility of preventing the manager concerned from carrying out any further marketing of its venture capital funds within the territory of the host Member State.
(40)
In order to ensure the effective supervision of the uniform criteria established in this Regulation, this Regulation contains a list of supervisory powers that competent authorities must have at their disposal.
(41)
In order to ensure proper enforcement, this Regulation contains administrative penalties and other measures for the breach of key provisions of this Regulation, which are the rules on portfolio composition, on safeguards relating to the identity of eligible investors, and on the use of the designation ‘EuVECA’ only by managers of qualifying venture capital funds that are registered in accordance with this Regulation. A breach of those key provisions should entail, where appropriate, the prohibition of the use of the designation and the removal of the manager concerned from the register.
(42)
Supervisory information should be exchanged between the competent authorities in the home and host Member States and ESMA.
(43)
Effective regulatory cooperation among the entities tasked with supervising compliance with the uniform criteria set out in this Regulation requires that a high level of professional secrecy should apply to all relevant national authorities and to ESMA.
(44)
In order to specify the requirements set out in this Regulation, the power to adopt acts in accordance with Article 290 TFEU should be delegated to the Commission in respect of the types of conflicts of interests managers of qualifying venture capital funds need to avoid and the steps to be taken in that respect. It is of particular importance that the Commission carry out appropriate consultations during its preparatory work, including at expert level. The Commission, when preparing and drawing up delegated acts, should ensure a simultaneous, timely and appropriate transmission of relevant documents to the European Parliament and to the Council.
(45)
Technical standards in financial services should ensure consistent harmonisation and a high level of supervision across the Union. As a body with highly specialised expertise, it would be efficient and appropriate to entrust ESMA with the elaboration of draft implementing technical standards where these do not involve policy choices, for submission to the Commission.
(46)
The Commission should be empowered to adopt implementing technical standards by means of implementing acts pursuant to Article 291 TFEU and in accordance with Article 15 of Regulation (EU) No 1095/2010. ESMA should be entrusted with drafting implementing technical standards for the format of the notification referred to in this Regulation.
(47)
Within four years of the date of application of this Regulation, the Commission should conduct a review of this Regulation in order to assess the development of the venture capital market. The review should include a general survey of the functioning of the rules in this Regulation and the experience acquired in applying them. On the basis of the review, the Commission should submit a report to the European Parliament and to the Council accompanied, if appropriate, by legislative proposals.
(48)
Furthermore, within four years of the date of application of this Regulation, the Commission should start a review of the interaction between this Regulation and other rules on collective investment undertakings and their managers, in particular those of Directive 2011/61/EU. In particular, that review should address the scope of this Regulation assessing whether it is necessary to extend the scope to allow larger alternative investment funds managers to use the designation ‘EuVECA’. On the basis of the review, the Commission should submit a report to the European Parliament and to the Council accompanied, if appropriate, by legislative proposals.
(49)
In the context of that review, the Commission should evaluate any barriers that may have impeded the uptake of the funds by investors, including the impact on institutional investors of other regulation as may apply to them of a prudential nature. In addition, the Commission should gather data for assessing the contribution of the designation ‘EuVECA’ to other Union programmes, such as Horizon 2020, which also seek to support innovation in the Union.
(50)
In light of the Commission Communication of 6 October 2010 entitled ‘European 2020 Flagship Initiative: Innovation Union’ and the Commission Communication of 7 December 2011 entitled ‘An action plan to improve access to finance for SMEs’, it is important to ensure the effectiveness of public schemes across the Union to support the venture capital market, and the coordination and mutual coherence of different Union policies aimed at fostering innovation, including policies on competition and research. A key focus of Union policies on innovation and growth is green technology, given the objective of the Union to be a global leader on smart and sustainable growth and on energy and resource efficiency, including in respect of financing for SMEs. When reviewing this Regulation, the Commission should assess its impact on progress towards that objective.
(51)
ESMA should assess its staffing and resources needs arising from the assumption of its powers and duties in accordance with this Regulation and submit a report to the European Parliament, to the Council and to the Commission.
(52)
The European Investment Fund (EIF) invests, inter alia, in venture capital funds across the Union. The measures in this Regulation to allow for the easy identification of venture capital funds with defined common features should make it easier for the EIF to identify venture capital funds under this Regulation as possible investment targets. The EIF should therefore be encouraged to invest in qualifying venture capital funds.
(53)
This Regulation respects fundamental rights and observes the principles recognised in particular by the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union, including the right to respect for private and family life (Article 7) and freedom to conduct a business (Article 16).
(54)
Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 October 1995 on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data (8) governs the processing of personal data carried out in the Member States in the context of this Regulation and under the supervision of the Member States competent authorities, in particular the public independent authorities designated by the Member States. Regulation (EC) No 45/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 December 2000 on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data by the Community institutions and bodies and on the free movement of such data (9), governs the processing of personal data carried out by ESMA within the framework of this Regulation and under the supervision of the European Data Protection Supervisor.
(55)
This Regulation should be without prejudice to the application of State aid rules to qualifying venture capital funds.
(56)
Since the objectives of this Regulation, namely to ensure uniform requirements apply to the marketing of qualifying venture capital funds and to establish a simple registration system for managers of qualifying venture capital funds, thereby facilitating the marketing of qualifying venture capital funds throughout the Union, while taking full account of the need to balance safety and reliability associated with the use of the designation ‘EuVECA’ with the efficient operation of the venture capital market and the cost for its various stakeholders, cannot be sufficiently achieved by the Member States and can therefore, by reason of its scale and effects, be better achieved at Union level, the Union may adopt measures in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity as set out in Article 5 of the Treaty on European Union. In accordance with the principle of proportionality, as set out in that Article, this Regulation does not go beyond what is necessary in order to achieve those objectives,
HAVE ADOPTED THIS REGULATION:
