Article 12
1.   Managers of qualifying venture capital funds shall make available an annual report to the competent authority of the home Member State for each qualifying venture capital fund that they manage, by six months following the end of the financial year. The report shall describe the composition of the portfolio of the qualifying venture capital fund and the activities of the previous year. It shall also disclose the profits earned by the qualifying venture capital fund at the end of its life and, where applicable, the profits distributed during its life. It shall contain the audited financial accounts for the qualifying venture capital fund.
The annual report shall be produced in accordance with existing reporting standards and the terms agreed between the managers of qualifying venture capital funds and the investors. Managers of qualifying venture capital funds shall provide the report to investors on request. Managers of qualifying venture capital funds and investors may agree to make additional disclosures to each other.
2.   An audit of the qualifying venture capital fund shall be conducted at least annually. The audit shall confirm that money and assets are held in the name of the qualifying venture capital fund and that the manager of a qualifying venture capital fund has established and maintained adequate records and checks in respect of the use of any mandate or control over the money and assets of the qualifying venture capital fund and the investors therein.
3.   Where the manager of a qualifying venture capital fund is required to make public an annual financial report in accordance with Article 4 of Directive 2004/109/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 December 2004 on the harmonisation of transparency requirements in relation to information about issuers whose securities are admitted to trading on a regulated market (12) in relation to the qualifying venture capital fund, the information referred to in paragraph 1 may be provided separately or as an additional part of the annual financial report.
