Article 60
Decisions and complaints
1.   Regulatory authorities shall have the authority to require transmission system operators and distribution system operators, if necessary, to modify the terms and conditions, including tariffs or methodologies referred to Article 59 of this Directive, to ensure that they are proportionate and applied in a non-discriminatory manner, in accordance with Article 18 of Regulation (EU) 2019/943. In the event of delay in the fixing of transmission and distribution tariffs, regulatory authorities shall have the power to fix or approve provisional transmission and distribution tariffs or methodologies and to decide on the appropriate compensatory measures if the final transmission and distribution tariffs or methodologies deviate from those provisional tariffs or methodologies.
2.   Any party having a complaint against a transmission or distribution system operator in relation to that operator's obligations under this Directive may refer the complaint to the regulatory authority which, acting as dispute settlement authority, shall issue a decision within two months of receipt of the complaint. That period may be extended by two months where additional information is sought by the regulatory authority. That extended period may be further extended with the agreement of the complainant. The regulatory authority's decision shall have binding effect unless and until overruled on appeal.
3.   Any party who is affected and who has a right to complain concerning a decision on methodologies taken pursuant to Article 59 or, where the regulatory authority has a duty to consult, concerning the proposed tariffs or methodologies, may, within two months, or within a shorter period as provided for by Member States, after publication of the decision or proposal for a decision, submit a complaint for review. Such a complaint shall not have suspensive effect.
4.   Member States shall create appropriate and efficient mechanisms for regulation, control and transparency so as to avoid any abuse of a dominant position, in particular to the detriment of consumers, and any predatory behaviour. Those mechanisms shall take account of the provisions of the TFEU, and in particular Article 102 thereof.
5.   Member States shall ensure that the appropriate measures are taken, including administrative action or criminal proceedings in conformity with their national law, against the natural or legal persons responsible where confidentiality rules imposed by this Directive have not been respected.
6.   Complaints referred to in paragraphs 2 and 3 shall be without prejudice to the exercise of rights of appeal under Union or national law.
7.   Decisions taken by regulatory authorities shall be fully reasoned and justified to allow for judicial review. The decisions shall be available to the public while preserving the confidentiality of commercially sensitive information.
8.   Member States shall ensure that suitable mechanisms exist at national level under which a party affected by a decision of a regulatory authority has a right of appeal to a body independent of the parties involved and of any government.
