Article 63
GOVSATCOM capacities and services
1.   The provision of GOVSATCOM capacities and services shall be ensured as laid down in the service portfolio referred to in paragraph 3 of this Article and in accordance with the operational requirements referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article, GOVSATCOM specific security requirements referred to in Article 34(2) and within the limits of the sharing and prioritisation rules referred to in Article 66.
Access to GOVSATCOM capacities and services shall be free of charge for institutional and governmental GOVSATCOM users unless the Commission defines a pricing policy in accordance with Article 66(2).
2.   The Commission shall adopt, by means of implementing acts, the operational requirements for GOVSATCOM services, in the form of technical specifications for GOVSATCOM use-cases related in particular to crisis management, surveillance and key infrastructure management, including diplomatic communication networks. Those operational requirements shall be based on the detailed analysis of the requirements of GOVSATCOM users and shall take into account requirements stemming from existing user equipment and networks. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 107(3).
3.   The Commission shall adopt, by means of implementing acts, the service portfolio for GOVSATCOM services, in the form of a list of categories of satellite communication capacities and services and their attributes, including geographical coverage, frequency, bandwidth, user equipment, and security features. The service portfolio shall take into consideration existing commercially available services in order not to distort competition in the internal market. Those implementing acts shall be regularly updated and shall be based on the operational and security requirements referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article and shall prioritise services provided to users according to their relevance and criticality. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 107(3).
4.   GOVSATCOM users shall have access to the GOVSATCOM capacities and services listed in the service portfolio referred to in paragraph 3 of this Article. That access shall be provided through the GOVSATCOM Hubs referred to in Article 67(1).
