Article 84
The Agency’s budget
1.   Without prejudice to other resources and dues, the revenue of the Agency shall include a Union contribution entered in Union budget in order to ensure a balance between revenue and expenditure. The Agency may receive ad hoc grants from the Union budget.
2.   The expenditure of the Agency shall cover staff, administrative and infrastructure expenditure, operating costs and expenditure associated with the functioning of the Security Accreditation Board, including the bodies referred to in Article 38(3) and Article 82(3), and the contracts and agreements concluded by the Agency in order to accomplish the tasks entrusted to it.
3.   Revenue and expenditure shall be in balance.
4.   The Executive Director shall, in close collaboration with the Chairperson of the Security Accreditation Board for activities under Chapter II of Title V, draw up a draft statement of estimates of revenue and expenditure for the Agency for the next financial year, making clear the distinction between those elements of the draft statement of estimates which relate to security accreditation activities and those relating to the Agency’s other activities. The Chairperson of the Security Accreditation Board may write a statement on that draft and the Executive Director shall forward both the draft statement of estimates and the statement to the Administrative Board and the Security Accreditation Board, together with a draft establishment plan.
5.   Each year, based on the draft statement of estimates of revenue and expenditure and in close cooperation with the Security Accreditation Board for activities under Chapter II of Title V, the Administrative Board shall draw up the statement of estimates of revenue and expenditure for the Agency for the next financial year.
6.   By 31 January each year, the Administrative Board shall forward a draft single programming document including inter alia a statement of estimates, a draft establishment plan and a provisional annual work programme to the Commission and to the third countries or international organisations with which the Agency has entered into arrangements in accordance with Article 98.
7.   The Commission shall forward the statement of estimates of revenue and expenditure to the European Parliament and to the Council (the ‘budgetary authority’) together with the draft general budget of the European Union.
8.   On the basis of the statement of estimates, the Commission shall enter in the draft general budget of the European Union the estimates it deems necessary for the establishment plan and the amount of the subsidy to be charged to the general budget. The Commission is to submit the draft general budget to the budgetary authority in accordance with Article 314 TFEU.
9.   The budgetary authority shall authorise the appropriations for the contribution to the Agency and shall adopt the establishment plan for the Agency.
10.   The budget shall be adopted by the Administrative Board. It shall become final following final adoption of the general budget of the European Union. Where necessary, the budget shall be adjusted accordingly.
11.   The Administrative Board shall, as soon as possible, notify the budgetary authority of its intention to implement any project which would have significant financial implications for the funding of the budget, in particular any projects relating to property such as the rental or purchase of buildings. It shall inform the Commission thereof.
12.   Where an arm of the budgetary authority has notified its intention to deliver an opinion, it shall forward its opinion to the Administrative Board within a period of six weeks from the date of notification of the project.
