Article 82
Organisational aspects of the Security Accreditation Board
1.   The Security Accreditation Board shall have access to all the human and material resources required to perform its tasks independently. It shall have access to any information useful for the performance of its tasks in the possession of the other bodies of the Agency, without prejudice to the principles of autonomy and independence referred to in point (i) of Article 37.
2.   The Security Accreditation Board and the Agency staff under its supervision shall perform their work in a manner ensuring autonomy and independence in relation to the other activities of the Agency, in particular operational activities associated with the exploitation of the systems, in accordance with the objectives of the Programme’s various components. A member of the Agency’s staff under the supervision of the Security Accreditation Board shall not at the same time be assigned to other tasks within the Agency.
To that end, an effective organisational segregation shall be established within the Agency between the staff involved in activities under Chapter II of Title V and the other staff of the Agency. The Security Accreditation Board shall immediately inform the Executive Director, the Administrative Board and the Commission of any circumstances that could hamper its autonomy or independence. In the event that no remedy is found within the Agency, the Commission shall examine the situation, in consultation with the relevant parties. On the basis of the outcome of that examination, the Commission shall take appropriate mitigation measures to be implemented by the Agency and shall inform the European Parliament and the Council thereof.
3.   The Security Accreditation Board shall set up special subordinate bodies, acting on its instructions, to deal with specific issues. In particular, while ensuring necessary continuity of work, it shall set up a panel to conduct security analysis reviews and tests and produce the relevant risk reports in order to assist it in preparing its decisions. The Security Accreditation Board may set up and disband expert groups to contribute to the work of the panel.
