Article 57
Participation of Member States in the SST sub-component
1.   Member States wishing to participate in the provision of SST services referred to in Article 55(1) covering all orbits shall submit a single joint proposal to the Commission demonstrating compliance with the following criteria:
(a)
ownership of, or access to, either adequate SST sensors available for the SST sub-component and human resources to operate them, or adequate operational analysis and data processing capabilities specifically designed for SST and available for the SST sub-component;
(b)
initial security risk assessment of each SST asset performed and validated by the relevant Member State;
(c)
an action plan taking into account the coordination plan adopted under Article 6 of Decision No 541/2014/EU, for the implementation of the activities set out in Article 54 of this Regulation;
(d)
the distribution of the different activities among the Expert Teams as designated pursuant to Article 58 of this Regulation;
(e)
the rules on the sharing of data necessary for achieving the objectives referred to in Article 4 of this Regulation.
As concerns criteria set out in points (a) and (b) of the first subparagraph, each Member State wishing to participate in the provision of SST services shall demonstrate compliance with those criteria separately.
As concerns criteria set out in points (c), (d) and (e) of the first subparagraph, all Member States wishing to participate in the provision of SST services shall demonstrate compliance with those criteria collectively.
2.   The criteria referred to in points (a) and (b) of the first subparagraph of paragraph 1 of this Article shall be deemed to be fulfilled by the Member States participating in the SST sub-component whose designated national entities are members of the Consortium established under Article 7(3) of Decision No 541/2014/EU as of 12 May 2021.
3.   Where no joint proposal has been submitted in accordance with paragraph 1 or where the Commission considers that a joint proposal thus submitted does not comply with the criteria referred to in paragraph 1, at least five Member States may submit a new joint proposal to the Commission, demonstrating compliance with the criteria referred to in paragraph 1.
4.   The Commission may adopt, by means of implementing acts, the detailed provisions concerning the procedures and elements referred to in paragraphs 1 to 3 of this Article. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 107(3).
