Article 29
Role of the Agency
1.   The Agency shall have the following own tasks:
(a)
to ensure, through its Security Accreditation Board, the security accreditation of all the Programme’s components in accordance with Chapter II of Title V;
(b)
to perform tasks referred to in Article 34(3) and (5);
(c)
to undertake communication, market development and promotion activities as regards the services offered by Galileo and EGNOS, in particular activities relating to the market uptake and coordination of user needs;
(d)
to undertake communication, market development and promotion activities as regards data, information and services offered by Copernicus, without prejudice to the activities performed by other entrusted entities and the Commission;
(e)
to provide expertise to the Commission, including for the preparation of the downstream space-related research priorities.
2.   The Commission shall entrust the following tasks to the Agency:
(a)
managing the exploitation of EGNOS and Galileo, as provided for in Article 44;
(b)
overarching coordination of user-related aspects of GOVSATCOM in close collaboration with Member States, relevant Union agencies, EEAS and other entities for the purpose of crisis management missions and operations;
(c)
implementing activities relating to the development of downstream applications based on the Programme’s components and fundamental elements and integrated applications based on the data and services provided by Galileo, EGNOS and Copernicus, including where funding has been made available for such activities in the context of the Horizon Europe or where necessary to fulfil the objectives referred to in point (b) of Article 4(1);
(d)
undertaking activities related to user uptake of data, information and services, offered by the Programme’s components other than Galileo and EGNOS; without affecting Copernicus activities and Copernicus Services entrusted to other entities;
(e)
specific actions referred to in Article 6.
3.   The Commission may, on the basis of the assessments referred to in Article 102(5), entrust other tasks to the Agency, provided that they do not duplicate activities performed by other entrusted entities in the context of the Programme and provided that they aim to improve the efficiency of the implementation of the Programme’s activities.
4.   Whenever activities are entrusted to the Agency, appropriate financial, human and administrative resources shall be ensured for their implementation.
5.   By way of derogation from Article 62(1) of the Financial Regulation and subject to the Commission’s assessment of the protection of the Union’s interests, the Agency may entrust, by means of contribution agreements, specific activities to other entities, in areas of their respective competence, under the conditions of indirect management applying to the Commission.
