Article 107
Committee procedure
1.   The Commission shall be assisted by the Programme committee. That committee shall be a committee within the meaning of Regulation (EU) No 182/2011.
The Programme committee shall meet in specific different configurations as follows:
(a)
Galileo and EGNOS;
(b)
Copernicus;
(c)
SSA;
(d)
GOVSATCOM;
(e)
Security configuration: all security aspects of the Programme, without prejudice to the role of the Security Accreditation Board; representatives of ESA and the Agency may be invited to participate as observers; the EEAS shall also be invited to assist;
(f)
Horizontal configuration: strategic overview of the implementation of the Programme, coherence across the Programme’s different components, cross-cutting measures and budget reallocation as referred to in Article 11.
2.   Where reference is made to this paragraph, Article 4 of Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 shall apply.
3.   Where reference is made to this paragraph, Article 5 of Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 shall apply.
4.   Where the Programme committee delivers no opinion on the draft implementing act referred to in Article 34(2) of this Regulation, the Commission shall not adopt the draft implementing act and the third subparagraph of Article 5(4) of Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 shall apply.
5.   In accordance with international agreements concluded by the Union, representatives of third countries or international organisations may be invited as observers in the meetings of the Programme committee under the conditions laid down in its rules of procedure, taking into account the security of the Union.
6.   The Programme committee shall, in accordance with its rules of procedure, set up the ‘User Forum’, as a working group to advise the Programme committee on user requirements aspects, evolution of the services and user uptake. The User Forum shall aim to guarantee a continuous and effective involvement of users and meet in specific configurations for each of the Programme’s components.
TITLE XII

TRANSITIONAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS

