Article 102
Evaluation
1.   The Commission shall carry out evaluations of the Programme in a timely manner to feed into the decision-making process.
2.   By 30 June 2024, and every four years thereafter, the Commission shall evaluate the implementation of the Programme. The evaluation shall cover all of the Programme’s components and actions. It shall assess:
(a)
the performance of the services provided under the Programme;
(b)
the evolution of needs of the users of the Programme; and
(c)
when evaluating the implementation of SSA and GOVSATCOM, the evolution of available capacities for sharing and pooling, or, when evaluating the implementation of Galileo, Copernicus and EGNOS, the evolution of data and services offered by competitors.
For each of the Programme’s components, the evaluation shall, on the basis of a cost-benefit analysis, also assess the impact of the evolutions referred to in point (c) of the first subparagraph, including the need for changing the pricing policy or the need for additional space or ground infrastructure.
If necessary, the evaluation shall be accompanied by an appropriate proposal.
3.   The Commission shall communicate the conclusions of the evaluations accompanied by its observations, to the European Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions.
4.   The entities involved in the implementation of this Regulation shall provide the Commission with the data and information necessary for the evaluation referred to in paragraph 1.
5.   By 30 June 2024, and every four years thereafter, the Commission shall assess the Agency’s performance, in relation to its objectives, mandate, and tasks, in accordance with Commission guidelines. The evaluation shall be based on a cost-benefit analysis. The evaluation shall, in particular, address the possible need to modify the mandate of the Agency and the financial implications of any such modification. It shall also address the Agency’s policy on conflicts of interest and the independence and autonomy of the Security Accreditation Board. The Commission may also evaluate the Agency’s performance to assess the possibility to entrust it with additional tasks, in accordance with Article 29(3). If necessary, the evaluation shall be accompanied by an appropriate proposal.
Where the Commission considers that there are no longer grounds for the Agency to continue pursuing its activities, given its objectives, mandate and tasks, it may propose to amend this Regulation accordingly.
The Commission shall submit a report on the evaluation of the Agency and its conclusions to the European Parliament, the Council, the Administrative Board and the Security Accreditation Board of the Agency. The findings of the evaluation shall be made public.
