Article 58
Organisational framework of Member States’ participation in the SST sub-component
1.   Each Member State which has submitted a joint proposal that has been found compliant by the Commission in accordance with Article 57(1) or that has been selected by the Commission pursuant to the procedure referred to in Article 57(3) shall designate a Constituting National Entity established on its territory to represent it. The designated Constituting National Entity shall be a Member State public authority or a body entrusted with the exercise of such public authority.
2.   The Constituting National Entities designated pursuant to paragraph 1 of this Article shall conclude an agreement creating an SST partnership (‘SST partnership agreement’) and laying down the rules and mechanisms for their cooperation in implementing the activities referred to in Article 54. In particular, the SST partnership agreement shall include the elements mentioned in points (c), (d) and (e) of Article 57(1) and the establishment of a risk management structure to ensure the implementation of the provisions on the use and secure exchange of SST data and SST information.
3.   The Constituting National Entities shall develop Union SST services of high quality in accordance with a multiannual plan, relevant key performance indicators and users’ requirements, on the basis of the activities of the Expert Teams referred to in paragraph 6 of this Article. The Commission may adopt, by means of implementing acts, the multiannual plan and the key performance indicators. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 107(3).
4.   The Constituting National Entities shall network existing and possible future sensors to operate them in a coordinated and optimised way with a view to establishing and maintaining an up-to-date common European catalogue, without affecting Member States’ prerogatives in the area of national security.
5.   Member States participating in the SST sub-component shall perform security accreditation on the basis of the general security requirements referred to in Article 34(2).
6.   Expert Teams shall be designated by the Member States participating in the SST sub-component to be in charge of specific issues related to the different SST activities. The Expert Teams shall be permanent, managed and staffed by the Constituting National Entities of the Member States which designated them and may include experts from every Constituting National Entity.
7.   The Constituting National Entities and Expert Teams shall ensure the protection of SST data, SST information and SST services.
8.   The Commission shall adopt, by means of implementing acts, detailed rules on the functioning of the organisational framework of the participation of Member States in the SST sub-component. Those rules shall also cover for the inclusion at a later stage of a Member State in the SST partnership by becoming a party to the SST partnership agreement referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 107(3).
