Article 11
Budget
1.   The financial envelope for the implementation of the Programme for the period from 1 January 2021 to 31 December 2027 and for covering the associated risks shall be EUR 14,880 billion in current prices.
The distribution of the amount referred to in the first subparagraph shall be broken down in the following categories of expenditure:
(a)
for Galileo and EGNOS: EUR 9,017 billion;
(b)
for Copernicus: EUR 5,421 billion;
(c)
for SSA and GOVSATCOM: EUR 0,442 billion.
2.   The Commission may reallocate funds between the categories of expenditure referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article, up to a ceiling of 7,5 % of the category of expenditure that receives the funds or the category that provides the funds. The Commission may, by means of implementing acts, reallocate funds between the categories of expenditure referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article when that reallocation exceeds a cumulative amount greater than 7,5 % of the amount allocated to the category of expenditure that receives the funds or the category that provides the funds. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 107(3).
3.   Additional measures as provided for in Article 3(2), namely activities referred to in Articles 5 and 6, shall be financed under the Programme’s components.
4.   The Union budget appropriations assigned to the Programme shall cover all the activities required to fulfil the objectives referred to in Article 4. Such expenditure may cover:
(a)
studies and meetings of experts, in particular compliance with its cost and time constraints;
(b)
information and communication activities, including corporate communication on the policy priorities of the Union where they are directly linked to the objectives of this Regulation, with a particular view to creating synergies with other Union policies;
(c)
the information technology networks whose function it is to process or exchange information, and the administrative management measures, including in the field of security, implemented by the Commission;
(d)
technical and administrative assistance for the implementation of the Programme, such as preparatory, monitoring, control, audit and evaluation activities including corporate information technology systems.
5.   Actions that receive cumulative funding from different Union programmes shall be audited only once, covering all involved programmes and their respective applicable rules.
6.   The budgetary commitments relating to the Programme and which cover activities extending over more than one financial year may be broken down over several years into annual instalments.
7.   Resources allocated to Member States under shared management may, at the request of the Member State concerned, be transferred to the Programme, subject to the conditions set out in Article 26 of the Common Provisions Regulation. The Commission shall implement those resources directly in accordance with point (a) of the first subparagraph of Article 62(1) of the Financial Regulation or indirectly in accordance with point (c) of that subparagraph. Those resources shall be used for the benefit of the Member State concerned.
