Article 17
National competent authorities and single points of contact
1.   Each Member State shall designate one or more competent authorities as responsible for the application of this Regulation. Member States shall designate a single point of contact from among their competent authorities.
2.   The single point of contact shall have the following tasks:
(a)
to coordinate within the Member State with regard to all questions related to this Regulation;
(b)
to support public sector bodies within the Member State to set up or adapt the processes by which they carry out interoperability assessments referred to in Article 3 and in the Annex;
(c)
to foster the share and reuse of interoperability solutions through the Interoperable Europe portal or another relevant portal;
(d)
to contribute country-specific knowledge to the Interoperable Europe portal;
(e)
to coordinate and encourage the active involvement of a diverse range of national, regional and local entities in policy implementation support projects and innovation measures referred to in Articles 9 to 14;
(f)
to support public sector bodies in the Member State to cooperate with the relevant public sector bodies in other Member States on topics covered by this Regulation.
3.   Member States shall ensure that the competent authorities have adequate competence and resources to carry out, in an effective and efficient manner, the tasks assigned to them.
4.   The Member States shall set up the necessary cooperation structures between all national authorities involved in the implementation of this Regulation. Those structures may build on existing mandates and processes in the field.
5.   Each Member State shall notify to the Commission, without undue delay, the designation of its single point of contact and any subsequent change thereto and shall inform the Commission of other national authorities involved in the oversight of the interoperability policy. Each Member State shall make public the designation of their single point of contact. The Commission shall publish the list of the designated single points of contact.
