Article 9
Obligations of importers
1.   Importers shall place only compliant appliances or fittings on the market.
2.   Before placing an appliance on the market, importers shall ensure that the appropriate conformity assessment procedure referred to in Article 14 has been carried out by the manufacturer. They shall ensure that the manufacturer has drawn up the technical documentation, that the appliance bears the CE marking and is accompanied by instructions and safety information in accordance with point 1.5 of Annex I, and that the manufacturer has complied with the requirements set out in Article 7(5) and (6).
Before placing a fitting on the market, importers shall ensure that the appropriate conformity assessment procedure referred to in Article 14 has been carried out by the manufacturer. They shall ensure that the manufacturer has drawn up the technical documentation, that the fitting bears the CE marking and is accompanied by a copy of the EU declaration of conformity containing, inter alia, instructions for incorporation or assembly, adjustment, operation and maintenance in accordance with point 1.7 of Annex I, and that the manufacturer has complied with the requirements set out in Article 7(5) and (6).
Where an importer considers or has reason to believe that an appliance or a fitting is not in conformity with the essential requirements set out in Annex I, he shall not place the appliance or the fitting on the market until it has been brought into conformity. Furthermore, where the appliance or the fitting presents a risk, the importer shall inform the manufacturer and the market surveillance authorities to that effect.
3.   Importers shall indicate on the appliance their name, registered trade name or registered trade mark, and the postal address at which they can be contacted or, where that is not possible, on its packaging or in a document accompanying the appliance. The contact details shall be in a language easily understood by consumers and other end-users and the market surveillance authorities.
Importers shall indicate on the fitting their name, registered trade name or registered trade mark, and the postal address at which they can be contacted or, where that is not possible, on its packaging or in a document accompanying the fitting. The contact details shall be in a language easily understood by appliance manufacturers and the market surveillance authorities.
4.   Importers shall ensure that the appliance is accompanied by instructions and safety information in accordance with point 1.5 of Annex I, in a language which can be easily understood by consumers and other end-users, as determined by the Member State concerned.
Importers shall ensure that the fitting is accompanied by a copy of the EU declaration of conformity containing, inter alia, instructions for incorporation or assembly, adjustment, operation and maintenance in accordance with point 1.7 of Annex I, in a language which can be easily understood by appliance manufacturers, as determined by the Member State concerned.
5.   Importers shall ensure that, while an appliance or a fitting is under their responsibility, storage or transport conditions do not jeopardise its compliance with the essential requirements set out in Annex I.
6.   When deemed appropriate with regard to the risks presented by an appliance, importers shall, to protect the health and safety of consumers and other users, carry out sample testing of appliances made available on the market, investigate, and, if necessary, keep a register of complaints, of non-conforming appliances and fittings and recalls of such appliances and fittings, and shall keep distributors informed of any such monitoring.
7.   Importers who consider or have reason to believe that an appliance or a fitting which they have placed on the market is not in conformity with this Regulation shall immediately take the corrective measures necessary to bring that appliance or fitting into conformity, to withdraw it or recall it, if appropriate. Furthermore, where the appliance or the fitting presents a risk, importers shall immediately inform the competent national authorities of the Member States in which they made the appliance or the fitting available on the market to that effect, giving details, in particular, of the non-compliance and of any corrective measures taken.
8.   Importers shall, for 10 years after the appliance or the fitting has been placed on the market, keep a copy of the EU declaration of conformity at the disposal of the market surveillance authorities and ensure that the technical documentation can be made available to those authorities, upon request.
9.   Importers shall, further to a reasoned request from a competent national authority, provide it with all the information and documentation necessary to demonstrate the conformity of an appliance or a fitting in a language which can be easily understood by that authority. That information and documentation may be provided in paper or electronic form. They shall cooperate with that authority, at its request, on any action taken to eliminate the risks posed by appliances or fittings which they have placed on the market.
