Article 10
Obligations of distributors
1.   When making an appliance or a fitting available on the market distributors shall act with due care in relation to the requirements of this Regulation.
2.   Before making an appliance available on the market, distributors shall verify that the appliance bears the CE marking and that it is accompanied by instructions and safety information in accordance with point 1.5 of Annex I, in a language which can be easily understood by consumers and other end-users, as determined by the Member State in which the appliance is to be made available on the market, and that the manufacturer and the importer have complied with the requirements set out in Article 7(5) and (6) and Article 9(3) respectively.
Before making a fitting available on the market, distributors shall verify that the fitting bears the CE marking and that it is accompanied by a copy of the EU declaration of conformity containing, inter alia, instructions for incorporation or assembly, adjustment, operation and maintenance in accordance with point 1.7 of Annex I, in a language which can be easily understood by appliance manufacturers, as determined by the Member State concerned, and that the manufacturer and the importer have complied with the requirements set out in Article 7(5) and (6) and Article 9(3) respectively.
Where a distributor considers or has reason to believe that an appliance or a fitting is not in conformity with the essential requirements set out in Annex I, he shall not make the appliance or the fitting available on the market until it has been brought into conformity. Furthermore, where the appliance or the fitting presents a risk, the distributor shall inform the manufacturer or the importer to that effect as well as the market surveillance authorities.
3.   Distributors shall ensure that, while an appliance or a fitting is under their responsibility, storage or transport conditions do not jeopardise its compliance with the essential requirements set out in Annex I.
4.   Distributors who consider or have reason to believe that an appliance or a fitting which they have made available on the market is not in conformity with this Regulation shall make sure that the corrective measures necessary to bring that appliance or fitting into conformity, to withdraw it or recall it, if appropriate, are taken. Furthermore, where the appliance or the fitting presents a risk, distributors shall immediately inform the competent national authorities of the Member States in which they made the appliance or the fitting available on the market to that effect, giving details, in particular, of the non-compliance and of any corrective measures taken.
5.   Distributors shall, further to a reasoned request from a competent national authority, provide it with all the information and documentation necessary to demonstrate the conformity of an appliance or a fitting. That information and documentation may be provided in paper or electronic form. They shall cooperate with that authority, at its request, on any action taken to eliminate the risks posed by appliances or fittings which they have made available on the market.
