Whereas:
(1)
The Union is facing unprecedented challenges resulting from increased dependence on energy imports and scarce energy resources, and the need to limit climate change and to overcome the economic crisis. Energy efficiency is a valuable means to address these challenges. It improves the Union’s security of supply by reducing primary energy consumption and decreasing energy imports. It helps to reduce greenhouse gas emissions in a cost-effective way and thereby to mitigate climate change. Shifting to a more energy-efficient economy should also accelerate the spread of innovative technological solutions and improve the competitiveness of industry in the Union, boosting economic growth and creating high quality jobs in several sectors related to energy efficiency.
(2)
The Conclusions of the European Council of 8 and 9 March 2007 emphasised the need to increase energy efficiency in the Union to achieve the objective of saving 20 % of the Union’s primary energy consumption by 2020 compared to projections. The conclusions of the European Council of 4 February 2011 emphasised that the 2020 20 % energy efficiency target as agreed by the June 2010 European Council, which is presently not on track, must be delivered. Projections made in 2007 showed a primary energy consumption in 2020 of 1 842 Mtoe. A 20 % reduction results in 1 474 Mtoe in 2020, i.e. a reduction of 368 Mtoe as compared to projections.
(3)
The Conclusions of the European Council of 17 June 2010 confirmed the energy efficiency target as one of the headline targets of the Union’s new strategy for jobs and smart, sustainable and inclusive growth (‘Europe 2020 Strategy’). Under this process and in order to implement this objective at national level, Member States are required to set national targets in close dialogue with the Commission and to indicate, in their National Reform Programmes, how they intend to achieve them.
(4)
The Commission Communication of 10 November 2010 on Energy 2020 places energy efficiency at the core of the Union energy strategy for 2020 and outlines the need for a new energy efficiency strategy that will enable all Member States to decouple energy use from economic growth.
(5)
In its resolution of 15 December 2010 on the Revision of the Energy Efficiency Action Plan, the European Parliament called on the Commission to include in its revised Energy Efficiency Action Plan measures to close the gap to reach the overall Union energy efficiency objective in 2020.
(6)
One of the initiatives of the Europe 2020 Strategy is the flagship resource-efficient Europe adopted by the Commission on 26 January 2011. This identifies energy efficiency as a major element in ensuring the sustainability of the use of energy resources.
(7)
The Conclusions of the European Council of 4 February 2011 acknowledged that the Union energy efficiency target is not on track and that determined action is required to tap the considerable potential for higher energy savings in buildings, transport, products and processes. Those conclusions also provide that the implementation of the Union energy efficiency target will be reviewed by 2013 and further measures considered if necessary.
(8)
On 8 March 2011, the Commission adopted its Communication on an Energy Efficiency Plan 2011. The Communication confirmed that the Union is not on track to achieve its energy efficiency target. This is despite the progress in national energy efficiency policies outlined in the first National Energy Efficiency Action Plans submitted by Member States in fulfilment of the requirements of Directive 2006/32/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5 April 2006 on energy end-use efficiency and energy services (4). Initial analysis of the second Action Plans confirms that the Union is not on track. To remedy that, the Energy Efficiency Plan 2011 spelled out a series of energy efficiency policies and measures covering the full energy chain, including energy generation, transmission and distribution; the leading role of the public sector in energy efficiency; buildings and appliances; industry; and the need to empower final customers to manage their energy consumption. Energy efficiency in the transport sector was considered in parallel in the White Paper on Transport, adopted on 28 March 2011. In particular, Initiative 26 of the White Paper calls for appropriate standards for CO2 emissions of vehicles in all modes, where necessary supplemented by requirements on energy efficiency to address all types of propulsion systems.
(9)
On 8 March 2011, the Commission also adopted a Roadmap for moving to a competitive low carbon economy in 2050, identifying the need from this perspective for more focus on energy efficiency.
(10)
In this context it is necessary to update the Union’s legal framework for energy efficiency with a Directive pursuing the overall objective of the energy efficiency target of saving 20 % of the Union’s primary energy consumption by 2020, and of making further energy efficiency improvements after 2020. To that end, this Directive should establish a common framework to promote energy efficiency within the Union and lay down specific actions to implement some of the proposals included in the Energy Efficiency Plan 2011 and achieve the significant unrealised energy saving potentials it identifies.
(11)
Decision No 406/2009/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 April 2009 on the effort of Member States to reduce their greenhouse gas emissions to meet the Community’s greenhouse gas emission reduction commitments up to 2020 (5) requires the Commission to assess and report by 2012 on the progress of the Union and its Member States towards the objective of reducing energy consumption by 20 % by 2020 compared to projections. It also states that, to help Member States meet the Union’s greenhouse gas emission reduction commitments, the Commission should propose, by 31 December 2012, strengthened or new measures to accelerate energy efficiency improvements. This Directive responds to this requirement. It also contributes to meeting the goals set out in the Roadmap for moving to a competitive low carbon economy in 2050, in particular by reducing greenhouse gas emissions from the energy sector, and to achieving zero emission electricity production by 2050.
(12)
An integrated approach has to be taken to tap all the existing energy saving potential, encompassing savings in the energy supply and the end-use sectors. At the same time, the provisions of Directive 2004/8/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 February 2004 on promotion of cogeneration based on a useful heat demand in the internal energy market (6) and Directive 2006/32/EC should be strengthened.
(13)
It would be preferable for the 20 % energy efficiency target to be achieved as a result of the cumulative implementation of specific national and European measures promoting energy efficiency in different fields. Member States should be required to set indicative national energy efficiency targets, schemes and programmes. These targets and the individual efforts of each Member State should be evaluated by the Commission, alongside data on the progress made, to assess the likelihood of achieving the overall Union target and the extent to which the individual efforts are sufficient to meet the common goal. The Commission should therefore closely monitor the implementation of national energy efficiency programmes through its revised legislative framework and within the Europe 2020 process. When setting the indicative national energy efficiency targets, Member States should be able to take into account national circumstances affecting primary energy consumption such as remaining cost-effective energy-saving potential, changes in energy imports and exports, development of all sources of renewable energies, nuclear energy, carbon capture and storage, and early action. When undertaking modelling exercises, the Commission should consult Member States on model assumptions and draft model results in a timely and transparent manner. Improved modelling of the impact of energy efficiency measures and of the stock and performance of technologies is needed.
(14)
Directive 2009/28/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 April 2009 on the promotion of the use of energy from renewable sources (7) states that Cyprus and Malta, due to their insular and peripheral character, rely on aviation as a mode of transport, which is essential for their citizens and their economy. As a result, Cyprus and Malta have a gross final consumption of energy in national air transport which is disproportionately high, i.e. more than three times the Community average in 2005, and are thus disproportionately affected by the current technological and regulatory constraints.
(15)
The total volume of public spending is equivalent to 19 % of the Union’s gross domestic product. For this reason the public sector constitutes an important driver to stimulate market transformation towards more efficient products, buildings and services, as well as to trigger behavioural changes in energy consumption by citizens and enterprises. Furthermore, decreasing energy consumption through energy efficiency improvement measures can free up public resources for other purposes. Public bodies at national, regional and local level should fulfil an exemplary role as regards energy efficiency.
(16)
Bearing in mind that the Council conclusions of 10 June 2011 on the Energy Efficiency Plan 2011 stressed that buildings represent 40 % of the Union’s final energy consumption, and in order to capture the growth and employment opportunities in the skilled trades and construction sectors, as well as in the production of construction products and in professional activities such as architecture, consultancy and engineering, Member States should establish a long-term strategy beyond 2020 for mobilising investment in the renovation of residential and commercial buildings with a view to improving the energy performance of the building stock. That strategy should address cost-effective deep renovations which lead to a refurbishment that reduces both the delivered and the final energy consumption of a building by a significant percentage compared with the pre-renovation levels leading to a very high energy performance. Such deep renovations could also be carried out in stages.
(17)
The rate of building renovation needs to be increased, as the existing building stock represents the single biggest potential sector for energy savings. Moreover, buildings are crucial to achieving the Union objective of reducing greenhouse gas emissions by 80-95 % by 2050 compared to 1990. Buildings owned by public bodies account for a considerable share of the building stock and have high visibility in public life. It is therefore appropriate to set an annual rate of renovation of buildings owned and occupied by central government on the territory of a Member State to upgrade their energy performance. This renovation rate should be without prejudice to the obligations with regard to nearly-zero energy buildings set in Directive 2010/31/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 19 May 2010 on the energy performance of buildings (8). The obligation to renovate central government buildings in this Directive complements that Directive, which requires Member States to ensure that when existing buildings undergo major renovation their energy performance is upgraded so that they meet minimum energy performance requirements. It should be possible for Member States to take alternative cost-efficient measures to achieve an equivalent improvement of the energy performance of the buildings within their central government estate. The obligation to renovate floor area of central government buildings should apply to the administrative departments whose competence extends over the whole territory of a Member State. When in a given Member State and for a given competence no such relevant administrative department exists that covers the whole territory, the obligation should apply to those administrative departments whose competences cover collectively the whole territory.
(18)
A number of municipalities and other public bodies in the Member States have already put into place integrated approaches to energy saving and energy supply, for example via sustainable energy action plans, such as those developed under the Covenant of Mayors initiative, and integrated urban approaches which go beyond individual interventions in buildings or transport modes. Member States should encourage municipalities and other public bodies to adopt integrated and sustainable energy efficiency plans with clear objectives, to involve citizens in their development and implementation and to adequately inform them about their content and progress in achieving objectives. Such plans can yield considerable energy savings, especially if they are implemented by energy management systems that allow the public bodies concerned to better manage their energy consumption. Exchange of experience between cities, towns and other public bodies should be encouraged with respect to the more innovative experiences.
(19)
With regard to the purchase of certain products and services and the purchase and rent of buildings, central governments which conclude public works, supply or service contracts should lead by example and make energy-efficient purchasing decisions. This should apply to the administrative departments whose competence extends over the whole territory of a Member State. When in a given Member State and for a given competence no such relevant administrative department exists that covers the whole territory, the obligation should apply to those administrative departments whose competences cover collectively the whole territory. The provisions of the Union’s public procurement directives should not however be affected. For products other than those covered by the energy efficiency requirements for purchasing in this Directive, Member States should encourage public bodies to take into account the energy efficiency of purchase.
(20)
An assessment of the possibility of establishing a ‘white certificate’ scheme at Union level has shown that, in the current situation, such a system would create excessive administrative costs and that there is a risk that energy savings would be concentrated in a number of Member States and not introduced across the Union. The objective of such a Union-level scheme could be better achieved, at least at this stage, by means of national energy efficiency obligation schemes for energy utilities or other alternative policy measures that achieve the same amount of energy savings. It is appropriate for the level of ambition of such schemes to be established in a common framework at Union level while providing significant flexibility to Member States to take fully into account the national organisation of market actors, the specific context of the energy sector and final customers’ habits. The common framework should give energy utilities the option of offering energy services to all final customers, not only to those to whom they sell energy. This increases competition in the energy market because energy utilities can differentiate their product by providing complementary energy services. The common framework should allow Member States to include requirements in their national scheme that pursue a social aim, in particular in order to ensure that vulnerable customers have access to the benefits of higher energy efficiency. Member States should determine, on the basis of objective and non-discriminatory criteria, which energy distributors or retail energy sales companies should be obliged to achieve the end-use energy savings target laid down in this Directive.
Member States should in particular be allowed not to impose this obligation on small energy distributors, small retail energy sales companies and small energy sectors to avoid disproportionate administrative burdens. The Commission Communication of 25 June 2008 sets out principles that should be taken into account by Member States that decide to abstain from applying this possibility. As a means of supporting national energy efficiency initiatives, obligated parties under national energy efficiency obligation schemes could fulfil their obligations by contributing annually to an Energy Efficiency National Fund an amount that is equal to the investments required under the scheme.
(21)
Given the over-arching imperative of restoring sustainability to public finances and of fiscal consolidation, in the implementation of particular measures falling within the scope of this Directive, due regard should be accorded to the cost-effectiveness at Member State level of implementing energy efficiency measures on the basis of an appropriate level of analysis and evaluation.
(22)
The requirement to achieve savings of the annual energy sales to final customers relative to what energy sales would have been does not constitute a cap on sales or energy consumption. Member States should be able to exclude all or part of the sales of energy, by volume, used in industrial activities listed in Annex I to Directive 2003/87/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 October 2003 establishing a scheme for greenhouse gas emission allowance trading within the Community (9) for the calculation of the energy sales to final customers, as it is recognised that certain sectors or subsectors within these activities may be exposed to a significant risk of carbon leakage. It is appropriate that Member States are aware of the costs of schemes in order to be able to accurately assess the costs of measures.
(23)
Without prejudice to the requirements in Article 7 and with a view to limiting the administrative burden, each Member State may group all individual policy measures to implement Article 7 into a comprehensive national energy efficiency programme.
(24)
To tap the energy savings potential in certain market segments where energy audits are generally not offered commercially (such as small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs)), Member States should develop programmes to encourage SMEs to undergo energy audits. Energy audits should be mandatory and regular for large enterprises, as energy savings can be significant. Energy audits should take into account relevant European or International Standards, such as EN ISO 50001 (Energy Management Systems), or EN 16247-1 (Energy Audits), or, if including an energy audit, EN ISO 14000 (Environmental Management Systems) and thus be also in line with the provisions of Annex VI to this Directive as such provisions do not go beyond the requirements of these relevant standards. A specific European standard on energy audits is currently under development.
(25)
Where energy audits are carried out by in-house experts, the necessary independence would require these experts not to be directly engaged in the activity audited.
(26)
When designing energy efficiency improvement measures, account should be taken of efficiency gains and savings obtained through the widespread application of cost-effective technological innovations such as smart meters. Where smart meters have been installed, they should not be used by companies for unjustified back billing.
(27)
In relation to electricity, and in accordance with Directive 2009/72/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 July 2009 concerning common rules for the internal market in electricity (10), where the roll-out of smart meters is assessed positively, at least 80 % of consumers should be equipped with intelligent metering systems by 2020. In relation to gas, and in accordance with Directive 2009/73/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 July 2009 concerning common rules for the internal market in natural gas (11), where the roll-out of intelligent metering systems is assessed positively, Member States or any competent authority they designate, should prepare a timetable for the implementation of intelligent metering systems.
(28)
Use of individual meters or heat cost allocators for measuring individual consumption of heating in multi-apartment buildings supplied by district heating or common central heating is beneficial when final customers have a means to control their own individual consumption. Therefore, their use makes sense only in buildings where radiators are equipped with thermostatic radiator valves.
(29)
In some multi-apartment buildings supplied by district heating or common central heating, the use of accurate individual heat meters would be technically complicated and costly due to the fact that the hot water used for heating enters and leaves the apartments at several points. It can be assumed that individual metering of heat consumption in multi-apartment buildings is, nevertheless, technically possible when the installation of individual meters would not require changing the existing in-house piping for hot water heating in the building. In such buildings, measurements of individual heat consumption can then be carried out by means of individual heat cost allocators installed on each radiator.
(30)
Directive 2006/32/EC requires Member States to ensure that final customers are provided with competitively priced individual meters that accurately reflect their actual energy consumption and provide information on actual time of use. In most cases, this requirement is subject to the conditions that it should be technically possible, financially reasonable, and proportionate in relation to the potential energy savings. When a connection is made in a new building or a building undergoes major renovations, as defined in Directive 2010/31/EU, such individual meters should, however, always be provided. Directive 2006/32/EC also requires that clear billing based on actual consumption should be provided frequently enough to enable consumers to regulate their own energy use.
(31)
Directives 2009/72/EC and 2009/73/EC require Member States to ensure the implementation of intelligent metering systems to assist the active participation of consumers in the electricity and gas supply markets. As regards electricity, where the roll-out of smart meters is found to be cost-effective, at least 80 % of consumers must be equipped with intelligent metering systems by 2020. As regards natural gas, no deadline is given but the preparation of a timetable is required. Those Directives also state that final customers must be properly informed of actual electricity/gas consumption and costs frequently enough to enable them to regulate their own consumption.
(32)
The impact of the provisions on metering and billing in Directives 2006/32/EC, 2009/72/EC and 2009/73/EC on energy saving has been limited. In many parts of the Union, these provisions have not led to customers receiving up-to-date information about their energy consumption, or billing based on actual consumption at a frequency which studies show is needed to enable customers to regulate their energy use. In the sectors of space heating and hot water in multi-apartment buildings the insufficient clarity of these provisions has also led to numerous complaints from citizens.
(33)
In order to strengthen the empowerment of final customers as regards access to information from the metering and billing of their individual energy consumption, bearing in mind the opportunities associated with the process of the implementation of intelligent metering systems and the roll out of smart meters in the Member States, it is important that the requirements of Union law in this area be made clearer. This should help reduce the costs of the implementation of intelligent metering systems equipped with functions enhancing energy saving and support the development of markets for energy services and demand management. Implementation of intelligent metering systems enables frequent billing based on actual consumption. However, there is also a need to clarify the requirements for access to information and fair and accurate billing based on actual consumption in cases where smart meters will not be available by 2020, including in relation to metering and billing of individual consumption of heating, cooling and hot water in multi-unit buildings supplied by district heating/cooling or own common heating system installed in such buildings.
(34)
When designing energy efficiency improvement measures, Member States should take due account of the need to ensure the correct functioning of the internal market and the coherent implementation of the acquis, in accordance with the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union.
(35)
High-efficiency cogeneration and district heating and cooling has significant potential for saving primary energy, which is largely untapped in the Union. Member States should carry out a comprehensive assessment of the potential for high-efficiency cogeneration and district heating and cooling. These assessments should be updated, at the request of the Commission, to provide investors with information concerning national development plans and contribute to a stable and supportive investment environment. New electricity generation installations and existing installations which are substantially refurbished or whose permit or licence is updated should, subject to a cost-benefit analysis showing a cost-benefit surplus, be equipped with high-efficiency cogeneration units to recover waste heat stemming from the production of electricity. This waste heat could then be transported where it is needed through district heating networks. The events that trigger a requirement for authorisation criteria to be applied will generally be events that also trigger requirements for permits under Directive 2010/75/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 November 2010 on industrial emissions (12) and for authorisation under Directive 2009/72/EC.
(36)
It may be appropriate for nuclear power installations, or electricity generation installations that are intended to make use of geological storage permitted under Directive 2009/31/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 April 2009 on the geological storage of carbon dioxide (13), to be located in places where the recovery of waste heat through high-efficiency cogeneration or by supplying a district heating or cooling network is not cost-effective. Member States should therefore be able to exempt those installations from the obligation to carry out a cost-benefit analysis for providing the installation with equipment allowing the recovery of waste heat by means of a high-efficiency cogeneration unit. It should also be possible to exempt peak-load and back-up electricity generation installations which are planned to operate under 1 500 operating hours per year as a rolling average over a period of five years from the requirement to also provide heat.
(37)
It is appropriate for Member States to encourage the introduction of measures and procedures to promote cogeneration installations with a total rated thermal input of less than 20 MW in order to encourage distributed energy generation.
(38)
High-efficiency cogeneration should be defined by the energy savings obtained by combined production instead of separate production of heat and electricity. The definitions of cogeneration and high-efficiency cogeneration used in Union legislation should be without prejudice to the use of different definitions in national legislation for purposes other than those of the Union legislation in question. To maximise energy savings and avoid energy saving opportunities being missed, the greatest attention should be paid to the operating conditions of cogeneration units.
(39)
To increase transparency for the final customer to be able to choose between electricity from cogeneration and electricity produced by other techniques, the origin of high-efficiency cogeneration should be guaranteed on the basis of harmonised efficiency reference values. Guarantee of origin schemes do not by themselves imply a right to benefit from national support mechanisms. It is important that all forms of electricity produced from high-efficiency cogeneration can be covered by guarantees of origin. Guarantees of origin should be distinguished from exchangeable certificates.
(40)
The specific structure of the cogeneration and district heating and cooling sectors, which include many small and medium-sized producers, should be taken into account, especially when reviewing the administrative procedures for obtaining permission to construct cogeneration capacity or associated networks, in application of the ‘Think Small First’ principle.
(41)
Most Union businesses are SMEs. They represent an enormous energy saving potential for the Union. To help them adopt energy efficiency measures, Member States should establish a favourable framework aimed at providing SMEs with technical assistance and targeted information.
(42)
Directive 2010/75/EU includes energy efficiency among the criteria for determining the Best Available Techniques that should serve as a reference for setting the permit conditions for installations within its scope, including combustion installations with a total rated thermal input of 50 MW or more. However, that Directive gives Member States the option not to impose requirements relating to energy efficiency on combustion units or other units emitting carbon dioxide on the site, for the activities listed in Annex I to Directive 2003/87/EC. Member States could include information on energy efficiency levels in their reporting under Directive 2010/75/EU.
(43)
Member States should establish, on the basis of objective, transparent and non-discriminatory criteria, rules governing the bearing and sharing of costs of grid connections and grid reinforcements and for technical adaptations needed to integrate new producers of electricity produced from high-efficiency cogeneration, taking into account guidelines and codes developed in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 714/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 July 2009 on conditions for access to the network for cross-border exchanges in electricity (14) and Regulation (EC) No 715/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 July 2009 on conditions for access to the natural gas transmission networks (15). Producers of electricity generated from high-efficiency cogeneration should be allowed to issue a call for tender for the connection work. Access to the grid system for electricity produced from high-efficiency cogeneration, especially for small scale and micro-cogeneration units, should be facilitated. In accordance with Article 3(2) of Directive 2009/72/EC and Article 3(2) of Directive 2009/73/EC, Member States may impose public service obligations, including in relation to energy efficiency, on undertakings operating in the electricity and gas sectors.
(44)
Demand response is an important instrument for improving energy efficiency, since it significantly increases the opportunities for consumers or third parties nominated by them to take action on consumption and billing information and thus provides a mechanism to reduce or shift consumption, resulting in energy savings in both final consumption and, through the more optimal use of networks and generation assets, in energy generation, transmission and distribution.
(45)
Demand response can be based on final customers’ responses to price signals or on building automation. Conditions for, and access to, demand response should be improved, including for small final consumers. Taking into account the continuing deployment of smart grids, Member States should therefore ensure that national energy regulatory authorities are able to ensure that network tariffs and regulations incentivise improvements in energy efficiency and support dynamic pricing for demand response measures by final customers. Market integration and equal market entry opportunities for demand-side resources (supply and consumer loads) alongside generation should be pursued. In addition, Member States should ensure that national energy regulatory authorities take an integrated approach encompassing potential savings in the energy supply and the end-use sectors.
(46)
A sufficient number of reliable professionals competent in the field of energy efficiency should be available to ensure the effective and timely implementation of this Directive, for instance as regards compliance with the requirements on energy audits and implementation of energy efficiency obligation schemes. Member States should therefore put in place certification schemes for the providers of energy services, energy audits and other energy efficiency improvement measures.
(47)
It is necessary to continue developing the market for energy services to ensure the availability of both the demand for and the supply of energy services. Transparency, for example by means of lists of energy services providers, can contribute to this. Model contracts, exchange of best practice and guidelines, in particular for energy performance contracting, can also help stimulate demand. As in other forms of third-party financing arrangements, in an energy performance contract the beneficiary of the energy service avoids investment costs by using part of the financial value of energy savings to repay the investment fully or partially carried out by a third party.
(48)
There is a need to identify and remove regulatory and non-regulatory barriers to the use of energy performance contracting and other third-party financing arrangements for energy savings. These barriers include accounting rules and practices that prevent capital investments and annual financial savings resulting from energy efficiency improvement measures from being adequately reflected in the accounts for the whole life of the investment. Obstacles to the renovating of the existing building stock based on a split of incentives between the different actors concerned should also be tackled at national level.
(49)
Member States and regions should be encouraged to make full use of the Structural Funds and the Cohesion Fund to trigger investments in energy efficiency improvement measures. Investment in energy efficiency has the potential to contribute to economic growth, employment, innovation and a reduction in fuel poverty in households, and therefore makes a positive contribution to economic, social and territorial cohesion. Potential areas for funding include energy efficiency measures in public buildings and housing, and providing new skills to promote employment in the energy efficiency sector.
(50)
Member States should encourage the use of financing facilities to further the objectives of this Directive. Such financing facilities could include financial contributions and fines from non-fulfilment of certain provisions of this Directive; resources allocated to energy efficiency under Article 10(3) of Directive 2003/87/EC; resources allocated to energy efficiency in the multiannual financial framework, in particular cohesion, structural and rural development funds, and dedicated European financial instruments, such as the European Energy Efficiency Fund.
(51)
Financing facilities could be based, where applicable, on resources allocated to energy efficiency from Union project bonds; resources allocated to energy efficiency from the European Investment Bank and other European financial institutions, in particular the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the Council of Europe Development Bank; resources leveraged in financial institutions; national resources, including through the creation of regulatory and fiscal frameworks encouraging the implementation of energy efficiency initiatives and programmes; revenues from annual emission allocations under Decision No 406/2009/EC.
(52)
The financing facilities could in particular use those contributions, resources and revenues to enable and encourage private capital investment, in particular drawing on institutional investors, while using criteria ensuring the achievement of both environmental and social objectives for the granting of funds; make use of innovative financing mechanisms (e.g. loan guarantees for private capital, loan guarantees to foster energy performance contracting, grants, subsidised loans and dedicated credit lines, third party financing systems) that reduce the risks of energy efficiency projects and allow for cost-effective renovations even among low and medium revenue households; be linked to programmes or agencies which will aggregate and assess the quality of energy saving projects, provide technical assistance, promote the energy services market and help to generate consumer demand for energy services.
(53)
The financing facilities could also provide appropriate resources to support training and certification programmes which improve and accredit skills for energy efficiency; provide resources for research on and demonstration and acceleration of uptake of small-scale and micro- technologies to generate energy and the optimisation of the connections of those generators to the grid; be linked to programmes undertaking action to promote energy efficiency in all dwellings to prevent energy poverty and stimulate landlords letting dwellings to render their property as energy-efficient as possible; provide appropriate resources to support social dialogue and standard-setting aiming at improving energy efficiency and ensuring good working conditions and health and safety at work.
(54)
Available Union financial instruments and innovative financing mechanisms should be used to give practical effect to the objective of improving the energy performance of public bodies’ buildings. In that respect, Member States may use their revenues from annual emission allocations under Decision No 406/2009/EC in the development of such mechanisms on a voluntary basis and taking into account national budgetary rules.
(55)
In the implementation of the 20 % energy efficiency target, the Commission will have to monitor the impact of new measures on Directive 2003/87/EC establishing the Union’s emissions trading scheme (ETS) in order to maintain the incentives in the emissions trading system rewarding low carbon investments and preparing the ETS sectors for the innovations needed in the future. It will need to monitor the impact on those industry sectors which are exposed to a significant risk of carbon leakage as determined in Commission Decision 2010/2/EU of 24 December 2009 determining, pursuant to Directive 2003/87/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council, a list of sectors and subsectors which are deemed to be exposed to a significant risk of carbon leakage (16), in order to ensure that this Directive promotes and does not impede the development of these sectors.
(56)
Directive 2006/32/EC requires Member States to adopt, and aim to achieve, an overall national indicative energy savings target of 9 % by 2016, to be reached by deploying energy services and other energy efficiency improvement measures. That Directive states that the second Energy Efficiency Plan adopted by the Member States shall be followed, as appropriate and where necessary, by Commission proposals for additional measures, including extending the period of application of targets. If a report concludes that insufficient progress has been made towards achieving the indicative national targets laid down by that Directive, these proposals are to address the level and nature of the targets. The impact assessment accompanying this Directive finds that the Member States are on track to achieve the 9 % target, which is substantially less ambitious than the subsequently adopted 20 % energy saving target for 2020, and therefore there is no need to address the level of the targets.
(57)
The Intelligent Energy Europe Programme established by Decision No 1639/2006/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 October 2006 establishing a Competitiveness and Innovation Framework Programme (2007 to 2013) (17) has been instrumental in creating an enabling environment for the proper implementation of the Union’s sustainable energy policies, by removing market barriers such as insufficient awareness and capacity of market actors and institutions, national technical or administrative barriers to the proper functioning of the internal energy market or underdeveloped labour markets to match the low-carbon economy challenge. Many of those barriers are still relevant.
(58)
In order to tap the considerable energy-saving potential of energy-related products, the implementation of Directive 2009/125/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 October 2009 establishing a framework for the setting of ecodesign requirements for energy-related products (18) and Directive 2010/30/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 19 May 2010 on the indication by labelling and standard product information of the consumption of energy and other resources by energy-related products (19) should be accelerated and widened. Priority should be given to products offering the highest energy-saving potential as identified by the Ecodesign Working Plan and the revision, where appropriate, of existing measures.
(59)
In order to clarify the conditions under which Member States can set energy performance requirements under Directive 2010/31/EU whilst respecting Directive 2009/125/EC and its implementing measures, Directive 2009/125/EC should be amended accordingly.
(60)
Since the objective of this Directive, namely to achieve the Union’s energy efficiency target of 20 % by 2020 and pave the way towards further energy efficiency improvements beyond 2020, cannot be sufficiently achieved by the Member States without taking additional energy efficiency measures, and can be better achieved at Union level, the Union may adopt measures, in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity as set out in Article 5 of the Treaty on European Union. In accordance with the principle of proportionality, as set out in that Article, this Directive does not go beyond what is necessary in order to achieve that objective.
(61)
In order to permit adaptation to technical progress and changes in the distribution of energy sources, the power to adopt acts in accordance with Article 290 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union should be delegated to the Commission in respect of the review of the harmonised efficiency reference values laid down on the basis of Directive 2004/8/EC and in respect of the values, calculation methods, default primary energy coefficient and requirements in the Annexes to this Directive. It is of particular importance that the Commission carry out appropriate consultations during its preparatory work, including at expert level. The Commission, when preparing and drawing up delegated acts, should ensure a simultaneous, timely and appropriate transmission of relevant documents to the European Parliament and the Council.
(62)
In order to ensure uniform conditions for the implementation of this Directive, implementing powers should be conferred on the Commission. Those powers should be exercised in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 February 2011 laying down the rules and general principles concerning mechanisms for control by Member States of the Commission’s exercise of implementing powers (20).
(63)
All substantive provisions of Directives 2004/8/EC and 2006/32/EC should be repealed, except Article 4(1) to (4) of, and Annexes I, III and IV to Directive 2006/32/EC. Those latter provisions should continue to apply until the deadline for the achievement of the 9 % target. Article 9(1) and (2) of Directive 2010/30/EU, which provides for an obligation for Member States only to endeavour to procure products having the highest energy efficiency class, should be deleted.
(64)
The obligation to transpose this Directive into national law should be limited to those provisions that represent a substantive change as compared with Directives 2004/8/EC and 2006/32/EC. The obligation to transpose the provisions which are unchanged arises under those Directives.
(65)
This Directive should be without prejudice to the obligations of the Member States relating to the time limits for transposition into national law and application of Directives 2004/8/EC and 2006/32/EC.
(66)
In accordance with the Joint Political Declaration of Member States and the Commission on explanatory documents of 28 September 2011, Member States have undertaken to accompany, in justified cases, the notification of their transposition measures with one or more documents explaining the relationship between the components of a directive and the corresponding parts of national transposition instruments. With regard to this Directive, the legislator considers the transmission of such documents to be justified,
HAVE ADOPTED THIS DIRECTIVE:
