Article 15
Energy transformation, transmission and distribution
1.   Member States shall ensure that national energy regulatory authorities pay due regard to energy efficiency in carrying out the regulatory tasks specified in Directives 2009/72/EC and 2009/73/EC regarding their decisions on the operation of the gas and electricity infrastructure.
Member States shall in particular ensure that national energy regulatory authorities, through the development of network tariffs and regulations, within the framework of Directive 2009/72/EC and taking into account the costs and benefits of each measure, provide incentives for grid operators to make available system services to network users permitting them to implement energy efficiency improvement measures in the context of the continuing deployment of smart grids.
Such systems services may be determined by the system operator and shall not adversely impact the security of the system.
For electricity, Member States shall ensure that network regulation and network tariffs fulfil the criteria in Annex XI, taking into account guidelines and codes developed pursuant to Regulation (EC) No 714/2009.
2.   Member States shall ensure, by 30 June 2015, that:
(a)
an assessment is undertaken of the energy efficiency potentials of their gas and electricity infrastructure, in particular regarding transmission, distribution, load management and interoperability, and connection to energy generating installations, including access possibilities for micro energy generators;
(b)
concrete measures and investments are identified for the introduction of cost-effective energy efficiency improvements in the network infrastructure, with a timetable for their introduction.
3.   Member States may permit components of schemes and tariff structures with a social aim for net-bound energy transmission and distribution, provided that any disruptive effects on the transmission and distribution system are kept to the minimum necessary and are not disproportionate to the social aim.
4.   Member States shall ensure the removal of those incentives in transmission and distribution tariffs that are detrimental to the overall efficiency (including energy efficiency) of the generation, transmission, distribution and supply of electricity or those that might hamper participation of demand response, in balancing markets and ancillary services procurement. Member States shall ensure that network operators are incentivised to improve efficiency in infrastructure design and operation, and, within the framework of Directive 2009/72/EC, that tariffs allow suppliers to improve consumer participation in system efficiency, including demand response, depending on national circumstances.
5.   Without prejudice to Article 16(2) of Directive 2009/28/EC and taking into account Article 15 of Directive 2009/72/EC and the need to ensure continuity in heat supply, Member States shall ensure that, subject to requirements relating to the maintenance of the reliability and safety of the grid, based on transparent and non-discriminatory criteria set by the competent national authorities, transmission system operators and distribution system operators when they are in charge of dispatching the generating installations in their territory:
(a)
guarantee the transmission and distribution of electricity from high-efficiency cogeneration;
(b)
provide priority or guaranteed access to the grid of electricity from high-efficiency cogeneration;
(c)
when dispatching electricity generating installations, provide priority dispatch of electricity from high-efficiency cogeneration in so far as the secure operation of the national electricity system permits.
Member States shall ensure that rules relating to the ranking of the different access and dispatch priorities granted in their electricity systems are clearly explained in detail and published. When providing priority access or dispatch for high-efficiency cogeneration, Member States may set rankings as between, and within different types of, renewable energy and high-efficiency cogeneration and shall in any case ensure that priority access or dispatch for energy from variable renewable energy sources is not hampered.
In addition to the obligations laid down by the first subparagraph, transmission system operators and distribution system operators shall comply with the requirements set out in Annex XII.
Member States may particularly facilitate the connection to the grid system of electricity produced from high-efficiency cogeneration from small-scale and micro-cogeneration units. Member States shall, where appropriate, take steps to encourage network operators to adopt a simple notification ‘install and inform’ process for the installation of micro-cogeneration units to simplify and shorten authorisation procedures for individual citizens and installers.
6.   Subject to the requirements relating to the maintenance of the reliability and safety of the grid, Member States shall take the appropriate steps to ensure that, where this is technically and economically feasible with the mode of operation of the high-efficiency cogeneration installation, high-efficiency cogeneration operators can offer balancing services and other operational services at the level of transmission system operators or distribution system operators. Transmission system operators and distribution system operators shall ensure that such services are part of a services bidding process which is transparent, non-discriminatory and open to scrutiny.
Where appropriate, Member States may require transmission system operators and distribution system operators to encourage high-efficiency cogeneration to be sited close to areas of demand by reducing the connection and use-of-system charges.
7.   Member States may allow producers of electricity from high-efficiency cogeneration wishing to be connected to the grid to issue a call for tender for the connection work.
8.   Member States shall ensure that national energy regulatory authorities encourage demand side resources, such as demand response, to participate alongside supply in wholesale and retail markets.
Subject to technical constraints inherent in managing networks, Member States shall ensure that transmission system operators and distribution system operators, in meeting requirements for balancing and ancillary services, treat demand response providers, including aggregators, in a non-discriminatory manner, on the basis of their technical capabilities.
Subject to technical constraints inherent in managing networks, Member States shall promote access to and participation of demand response in balancing, reserve and other system services markets, inter alia by requiring national energy regulatory authorities or, where their national regulatory systems so require, transmission system operators and distribution system operators in close cooperation with demand service providers and consumers, to define technical modalities for participation in these markets on the basis of the technical requirements of these markets and the capabilities of demand response. Such specifications shall include the participation of aggregators.
9.   When reporting under Directive 2010/75/EU, and without prejudice to Article 9(2) of that Directive, Member States shall consider including information on energy efficiency levels of installations undertaking the combustion of fuels with total rated thermal input of 50 MW or more in the light of the relevant best available techniques developed in accordance with Directive 2010/75/EU and Directive 2008/1/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 January 2008 concerning integrated pollution prevention and control (27).
Member States may encourage operators of installations referred to in the first subparagraph to improve their annual average net operational rates.
