Article 13
Implementation of the Programme
1.   The Commission shall implement the Programme in accordance with the Financial Regulation.
2.   The measures of the Programme may be implemented either directly by the Commission or, indirectly, by entities and persons other than Member States in accordance with Article 60 of the Financial Regulation. In particular, Union financial support for actions provided for in Article 6 of this Regulation shall take the form of:
(a)
grants, including grants to the Member States' national authorities;
(b)
public procurement contracts;
(c)
reimbursement of costs incurred by external experts, including experts from the national, regional or local authorities of Member States providing or receiving support;
(d)
contributions to trust funds set up by international organisations; and
(e)
actions carried out in indirect management.
3.   Grants may be awarded to the national authorities of Member States, the European Investment Bank group, international organisations, public or private bodies and entities legally established in any of the following:
(a)
Member States; and
(b)
European Free Trade Association countries which are party to the European Economic Area Agreement, in accordance with the conditions laid down therein.
The co-financing rate for grants shall be up to 100 % of the eligible costs, without prejudice to the principles of co-financing and no-profit.
4.   Support may also be provided by individual experts, who may be invited to contribute to selected activities organised under the Programme wherever that is necessary for the achievement of the specific objectives set out in Article 5.
5.   In order to implement the Programme, the Commission shall adopt, by way of implementing acts, annual work programmes and inform the European Parliament and the Council thereof. The annual work programmes shall set out the measures needed for their implementation, in line with the general and specific objectives referred to in Articles 4 and 5 of this Regulation, the selection and award criteria for grants, and all the elements required by the Financial Regulation.
6.   To ensure timely availability of resources, a limited part of the annual work programme shall be envisaged for special measures in the event of unforeseen and duly justified grounds of urgency requiring an immediate response, including a serious disturbance in the economy or significant circumstances seriously affecting the economic or social conditions in a Member State going beyond its control. The Commission may, on request by a Member State wishing to receive support, adopt special measures in accordance with the objectives and actions defined in this Regulation to support the national authorities in addressing urgent needs. Such special measures are interim in nature, and shall not be subject to the conditions set out in Article 7(1) and (2). The special measures shall end within six months and may be replaced by support in accordance with the conditions set out in Article 7.
