Whereas:
(1)
The economic and financial crisis has led to a lowering of the level of investments within the Union. Investment has fallen by approximately 15 % since its peak in 2007. The Union suffers in particular from a lack of investment as a consequence of fiscal constraints on Member States and from sluggish growth, thereby resulting in market uncertainty regarding the economic future. That lack of investment, which has been particularly severe in those Member States most affected by the crisis, has slowed down economic recovery and negatively affects job creation, long-term growth prospects and competitiveness, potentially preventing the attainment of the targets and objectives of the Europe 2020 strategy for smart, sustainable and inclusive growth. There is a need to strengthen the attractiveness of investing in Europe and in the infrastructure of a modern knowledge economy.
(2)
Comprehensive action is required to reverse the vicious circle created by a lack of investment and by increasing disparities between regions, and to reinforce confidence in the Union economy, while incentives for creating an investment-inducing environment in Member States could boost economic recovery. Together with a renewed impetus towards investment financing, structural reforms that are effective and economically and socially sustainable, as well as fiscal responsibility, constitute means of establishing a virtuous circle in which investment projects help support employment and demand and lead to a sustained reduction of the output gap as well as to an increase in growth potential. A European fund for strategic investments (EFSI), strengthened by Member State contributions, must be a complement to an overall strategy to improve Union competitiveness and attract investment.
(3)
In order to maximise the employment impact of the EFSI, Member States should continue to undertake structural reforms that are effective and economically and socially sustainable, as well as other initiatives such as training programmes and active labour market policies, support of conditions for the creation of quality and sustainable jobs, and investment in targeted social policies in line with the 2013 Social Investment Package. In addition, Member States should undertake additional activities such as customised training programmes to match the skills of workers to the needs of sectors benefiting from the EFSI, tailor-made business services for enterprises to prepare them to expand and create more jobs, as well as support for start-ups and self-employed individuals.
(4)
The G20, through the Global Infrastructure Initiative, has recognised the importance of investment in boosting demand and lifting productivity and growth and has committed itself to creating a climate that facilitates higher levels of investment.
(5)
Throughout the economic and financial crisis, the Union has made efforts to promote growth, in particular through initiatives set out in the Europe 2020 strategy which put in place an approach for smart, sustainable and inclusive growth, and through the European Semester for economic policy coordination. The European Investment Bank (EIB) has also strengthened its role in instigating and promoting investment within the Union, partly by way of an increase in capital in January 2013. Further action is required to ensure that the investment and macro-economic needs of the Union are addressed adequately, that the liquidity available on the market is used efficiently, and that the channelling of such liquidity towards the funding of viable investment projects is encouraged.
(6)
On 15 July 2014, the then President-elect of the Commission presented Political Guidelines for the next Commission to the European Parliament. Those Political Guidelines called for the mobilisation of ‘up to EUR 300 billion in additional public and private investment in the real economy over the next three years’ to stimulate investment for the purpose of job creation.
(7)
On 26 November 2014, the Commission issued a communication entitled ‘An Investment Plan for Europe’ (Investment Plan) which envisaged the creation of the EFSI, a transparent portal of investment projects at Union level (European Investment Project Portal) and an investment advisory hub (European Investment Advisory Hub) and placed emphasis on an agenda to remove obstacles to investment and complete the internal market.
(8)
The European Council on 18 December 2014 concluded that ‘fostering investment and addressing market failure in Europe is a key policy challenge’ and that ‘[t]he new focus on investment, coupled with Member States' commitment to intensifying structural reforms and to pursuing growth-friendly fiscal consolidation, will provide the foundation for growth and jobs in Europe’. The European Council called for ‘setting up a European Fund for Strategic Investments (EFSI) in the EIB Group with the aim to mobilise 315 billion euro in new investments between 2015 and 2017’, and invited the EIB Group ‘to start activities by using its own funds as of January 2015’. The European Council also underlined that ‘the EFSI will complement and be additional to ongoing EU programmes and traditional EIB activities’.
(9)
On 13 January 2015, the Commission issued a communication entitled ‘Making the best use of the flexibility within the existing rules of the Stability and Growth Pact’ detailing how it will apply those rules.
(10)
On 24 June 2015, the Commission declared that ‘without prejudice to the prerogatives of the Council in the implementation of the Stability and Growth Pact (SGP), one-off contributions by Member States, either by a Member State or by national promotional banks classified in the general government sector or acting on behalf of a Member State, into the EFSI or thematic or multi-country investment platforms established for the implementation of the Investment Plan, should in principle qualify as one-off measures, within the meaning of Article 5 of Council Regulation (EC) No 1466/97 (4) and Article 3 of Council Regulation (EC) No 1467/97 (5)’.
(11)
The EFSI should be part of a comprehensive strategy designed to address uncertainty surrounding public and private investments and to reduce the investment gaps in the Union. The strategy has three pillars: mobilising finance for investment, making investment reach the real economy and improving the investment environment in the Union. The strategy should boost competitiveness and economic recovery and should be complementary to the objective of economic, social and territorial cohesion across the Union. The EFSI should be seen as a complement to all other actions needed to reduce the investment gaps in the Union and – by acting as a guarantee fund – as a stimulus for new investments.
(12)
The investment environment within the Union should be improved by removing barriers to investment, ensuring that there is no discrimination based on whether the management of projects is private or public, reinforcing the internal market, and enhancing regulatory predictability. In its communication entitled ‘Commission Work Programme 2015: A New Start’, the Commission announced that ‘lightening the regulatory load while keeping high levels of social, health and environmental protection and consumer choice’ was a political priority, and that it would ‘overhaul the rules to make sure they contribute to the jobs and growth agenda’. The Commission and the Member States should embark on that task without delay. The work of the EFSI, and investments across the Union generally, should benefit from that accompanying work.
(13)
The purpose of the EFSI should be to help resolve the difficulties in financing and implementing strategic, transformative and productive investments with high economic, environmental and societal added value contributing to achieving Union policy objectives such as those set out in Regulation (EU) No 1287/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council (6), Regulation (EU) No 1291/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council (7), Regulation (EU) No 1315/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council (8) and Regulation (EU) No 1316/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council (9). It should aim to provide an immediate boost to the Union economy and to improve access to financing and the competitiveness of enterprises and other entities, with a particular focus on small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) and small mid-cap companies, with the aim of reducing unemployment levels and boosting growth in the Union.
The EFSI should therefore support strategic investments such as, but not limited to, projects of common interest which aim to complete the internal market in the transport, telecommunications and energy infrastructure sectors, including transport and energy interconnections, and digital infrastructure; to expand renewable energy and energy and resource efficiency; to develop and modernise the energy sector in accordance with the Energy Union priorities, including security of energy supply; and to contribute to the sustainable development of those sectors and exploit potential synergies between them. Those investments should also include projects of common interest in the urban and rural development and social fields and in the environmental and natural resources fields; projects which strengthen the Union's scientific and technological base and foster benefits for society as well as better exploitation of the economic and industrial potential of policies of innovation, research and technological development, including research infrastructure, and pilot and demonstration facilities; and projects relating to human capital, culture and health. Market-based incentives and the additionality provided by the EFSI should ensure that the EFSI targets socially and economically viable projects without any sectoral or regional pre-allocation, in particular to address high investment needs or market failures.
At the same time, the EFSI should be able to support environmentally sound projects and benefit industries and technologies with high growth potential and contribute to the transformation into a green, sustainable and resource-efficient economy. By overcoming the Union's current investment difficulties and reducing regional disparities, the EFSI should seek to contribute to strengthening the Union's competitiveness, research and innovation potential, economic, social and territorial cohesion, and to supporting an energy- and resource-efficient transition, including as regards infrastructure transition, towards a sustainable, renewable-based circular economy, through the creation of stable and fairly remunerated jobs. The EFSI should target projects of any size that promote quality job creation, short-, medium- and long-term sustainable growth and competitiveness, in particular where such projects have the highest incremental value, thereby contributing to achieving the Union's policy objectives in accordance with Article 9 of the Treaty on European Union (TEU) and Article 3 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU). For the purpose of reaching the general objectives set out in this Regulation, the EFSI should contribute to achieving the objectives set out in Articles 170, 173 and 179 TFEU and Article 194(1) TFEU.
(14)
The EFSI should support projects in the field of research, development and innovation. The investments supported under the EFSI should contribute to achieving existing Union programmes and policies and the targets and objectives of the Europe 2020 strategy for smart, sustainable and inclusive growth. They should support the implementation of the conclusions of the European Council of 17 June 2010.
(15)
The EFSI should support projects for the development of the energy sector. In its communication entitled ‘A Framework Strategy for a Resilient Energy Union with a Forward-Looking Climate Change Policy’, the Commission emphasised the importance of energy efficiency as an energy source in its own right and stated clearly that the EFSI ‘provides an opportunity to leverage major investments in renovating buildings’. Investments in energy efficiency are acknowledged to create up to two million jobs by 2020 and possibly another two million jobs by 2030. In order to ensure that the EFSI fulfils its purpose of leveraging private investments, delivering jobs, fostering resilient economic developments, and reducing macro-economic imbalances, a special focus on energy efficiency is needed. The EFSI should support projects in accordance with the Union's energy, climate and efficiency targets laid down in the Europe 2020 strategy and in the 2030 Framework for climate and energy policies and which aim to meet the objectives of the Europe 2020 strategy for smart, sustainable and inclusive growth.
(16)
The EFSI should support projects for the development of transport infrastructures, and equipment and innovative technologies for transport. EFSI support to transport infrastructure should contribute to the objectives of Regulations (EU) No 1315/2013 and (EU) No 1316/2013 by creating new or providing for missing infrastructure and also by modernising and rehabilitating existing facilities while allowing the financing of research and innovation operations in that sector. Particular attention should be paid to synergy projects strengthening the connections between transport, telecommunications and energy sectors and also to smart and sustainable urban transport projects.
(17)
The EFSI should provide financial support to entities having up to 3 000 employees, with a particular focus on SMEs and small mid-cap companies. The increased access to financing should be of particular benefit to SMEs, including for the creation of start-ups and academic spin-offs, social economy enterprises and non-profit organisations.
(18)
The EFSI should support projects for the development and deployment of information and communication technologies (ICT), including projects of common interest which aim to complete the internal market in the field of telecommunications and digital infrastructure.
(19)
The EFSI should support projects in the fields of environment and resource efficiency, including in the natural resources fields.
(20)
The EFSI should support projects in the fields of human capital, culture and health, including projects in the fields of education, training, the development of ICT skills and digital education, as well as projects in the cultural and creative sector, in tourism and in social fields. Investment in those fields should adopt a holistic approach which in each case displays appropriate respect for the intrinsic value of education and culture.
(21)
Many SMEs and mid-cap companies across the Union require assistance to attract market financing, especially as regards investments that carry a higher degree of risk. The EFSI should help those entities to overcome capital shortages, market failures and financial fragmentation resulting in an uneven playing field across the Union by allowing the EIB and the European Investment Fund (EIF) and national promotional banks or institutions, investment platforms or funds to provide direct and indirect equity injections, as well as to provide guarantees for high-quality securitisation of loans, and other products that are granted in pursuit of the aims of the EFSI.
(22)
The EFSI is to be established within the EIB. The work of the EFSI in providing finance to SMEs, small mid-cap companies and other entities is to be implemented mainly through the EIF.
(23)
The EFSI should support a wide range of financial products, including equity, debt and guarantees, to best accommodate the needs of the individual project. Such a wide range of products should allow the EFSI to adapt to market needs whilst encouraging private investment in projects. The EFSI should not be a substitute for private market finance or products provided by national promotional banks or institutions but should instead act as a catalyst for private finance by addressing market failures so as to ensure the most effective and strategic use of public money and should act as a means of further enhancing cohesion across the Union.
(24)
With the aim of better protecting and reaping commercial and economic benefits from Union co-funded initiatives, a set of rules established in Horizon 2020 – the Framework Programme for Research and Innovation 2014-2020, provided for in Regulation (EU) No 1291/2013, concerning the exploitation and dissemination of project results, including their protection through intellectual property, should, where possible, be respected by the participants of EFSI projects.
(25)
The impact of the EFSI on employment creation and, where possible, its quality should be systematically monitored by means of an annual assessment, on an aggregate basis, of outcomes and impact of EIB financing and investment operations supported under this Regulation.
(26)
The EFSI should ensure additionality by helping to address market failures or sub-optimal investment situations and supporting operations which could not have been carried out in the period during which the guarantee established pursuant to this Regulation (EU guarantee) can be used, or not to the same extent, by the EIB, the EIF or under existing Union financial instruments without EFSI support. For that purpose, the EFSI should typically target projects with a higher risk profile than projects supported by EIB normal operations.
(27)
The EFSI should target investments that are expected to be economically and technically viable, as confirmed by a cost-benefit analysis following Union standards. At the same time, the investments should meet the particular requirements for EFSI financing.
(28)
The EFSI should target investments with a degree of appropriate risk typically higher than that of EIB normal operations, whilst being consistent with Union policies, including the objective of smart, sustainable and inclusive growth, quality job creation, economic, social and territorial cohesion, as well as meeting the particular requirements for EFSI financing.
(29)
The EFSI should be provided with an appropriate governance structure the function of which should be commensurate with its sole purpose of ensuring the appropriate use of the EU guarantee. That governance structure should be composed of a steering board, a managing director and an investment committee. It should not encroach upon or interfere with the decision-making of the EIB, or be a substitute for the governing bodies of the latter. The Steering Board should in particular set the strategic orientations of the EFSI and the rules necessary for its functioning. The Managing Director should be responsible for the daily management of the EFSI and should carry out the preparatory work of the meetings of the Investment Committee.
(30)
The Investment Committee should take decisions on the use of the EU guarantee for potential projects and for the operations with national promotional banks or institutions or investment platforms in a transparent and independent manner. The Investment Committee should be composed of eight independent experts, representing a broad range of expertise as outlined in this Regulation, and the Managing Director. The Investment Committee should be accountable to the Steering Board, which should supervise the fulfilment of the EFSI's objectives and monitor on a continuous basis the respect by the members of the Investment Committee of their obligations under this Regulation.
(31)
In order to enable the EFSI to support investments, the Union should provide an EU guarantee which should not, at any time, exceed EUR 16 000 000 000. When provided on a portfolio basis, the guarantee coverage should be capped depending upon the type of instrument, such as debt, equity or guarantees, as a percentage of the volume of the portfolio of outstanding commitments. It is expected that when the EU guarantee is combined with EUR 5 000 000 000 to be provided by the EIB, the EFSI support should generate EUR 60 800 000 000 of additional investment by the EIB and the EIF. The amount of EUR 60 800 000 000 supported by the EFSI is expected to further generate a total of EUR 315 000 000 000 in investment in the Union within three years of the date of entry into force of this Regulation. The participation of Member States in the implementation of the Investment Plan is desirable to increase its impact. Guarantees that are attached to projects which are completed without a call on a guarantee should be available to support new operations.
(32)
Within three years from the entry into force of this Regulation, the Commission should submit to the European Parliament and to the Council a report containing an independent evaluation of the application of this Regulation. That report should specify whether the EFSI is achieving its objectives and whether a dedicated scheme supporting investment in the Union is warranted. In particular, the report should assess the achievement of the general objectives laid down in this Regulation, the mobilisation of private capital, as well as include an assessment of the additionality provided by the EFSI, of the risk profile of operations supported by the EFSI and of the macro-economic impact of the EFSI, including its impact on growth and employment. If the report concludes that maintaining a scheme for supporting investments is warranted, the Commission should, where appropriate, submit a proposal to the European Parliament and to the Council to amend this Regulation, in particular with a view to setting a new investment period, ensuring continuation of investment and appropriate financing. If the report concludes that the EFSI is not achieving its objectives and that maintaining a scheme for supporting investment is not warranted, the Commission should, where appropriate, submit a proposal to ensure a smooth termination of the EFSI while preserving the EU guarantee for the operations already approved under this Regulation.
(33)
The EIB will finance EFSI operations via its market issuances. The European Central Bank has communicated its decision to include EIB bonds in the list of bonds eligible for purchase under its Public Sector Purchase Programme (PSPP).
(34)
In order to reach the initial target of EUR 315 000 000 000 within the shortest possible time, national promotional banks or institutions and investment platforms and funds, with the support of the EU guarantee, should play a prominent role in identifying viable projects, developing and, where appropriate, bundling projects, and attracting potential investors. In that context, it should be possible to establish multi-country platforms to promote cross-border projects or a group of projects across Member States.
(35)
Investment platforms can, where appropriate, bring together co-investors, public authorities, experts, education, training and research institutions, the relevant social partners and representatives of the civil society and other relevant actors at Union, national and regional levels.
(36)
In order to allow for a further increase of its resources, participation in the EFSI should be open to third parties, including Member States. Other third parties such as regional governments, national promotional banks or institutions, regional banks or public agencies owned or controlled by Member States, private sector entities, and entities outside the Union, should also be able to contribute directly to the EFSI subject to the agreement of the Steering Board. A third party's participation in the EFSI should not confer upon that third party membership in the Steering Board or any other right concerning the EFSI governance structure.
(37)
This Regulation should not preclude entities that manage projects within the Union from establishing or enhancing cooperation with third-country partners.
(38)
The EFSI should have the possibility of supporting private fund structures, such as European Long-Term Investment Funds (ELTIFs). ELTIFs that comply with the requirements of Regulation (EU) 2015/760 of the European Parliament and of the Council (10) focus on long-term asset classes which allows them to play a role in providing a complementary vehicle for delivering public or private/public investments to the wider economy. By virtue of their investment policies, ELTIFs can fulfil their designated role as a priority tool to accomplish the Investment Plan. The Commission should prioritise and streamline its processes for all applications by ELTIFs for financing from the EIB.
(39)
Third parties should be able to co-finance projects together with the EFSI, either on a project-by-project basis or through investment platforms.
(40)
In order to mobilise investments at both the national and regional level, the EIB should be able to grant a guarantee under the counter-guarantee of the EU guarantee to national promotional banks or institutions, to investment platforms or funds, where applicable seeking to achieve capital relief. Such operations should be considered EFSI operations.
(41)
In light of the general aim of ensuring a regulatory environment conducive to investments, and in light of the fact that infrastructure assets have a strong default and recovery record and that infrastructure project finance can be seen as a means of diversifying institutional investors' asset portfolios, the treatment of infrastructure investments, as currently provided for in relevant Union prudential legislation, should be re-examined.
(42)
The EFSI should complement, and be additional to, ongoing regional, national and Union programmes as well as existing EIB operations and activities. In that context, the full use of all existing and allocated Union resources should be encouraged under the existing rules. Provided that all relevant eligibility criteria are met, Member States should be able to use any type of Union financing to contribute to the financing of eligible projects that are backed by the EU guarantee, and to support national promotional banks or institutions, investment platforms or funds. The flexibility of that approach should maximise the potential to attract investors to the areas of investment targeted by the EFSI.
(43)
Member States should be able to use European Structural and Investment Funds to contribute to the financing of eligible projects that are supported by the EU guarantee, in accordance with the objectives, principles and rules under the legal framework applicable to those funds, and in particular Regulation (EU) No 1303/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council (11) and with Partnership Agreements. The Commission should be able to provide guidance so as to ensure that the combined use of Union instruments with EIB financing under the EU guarantee allows an appropriate level of complementarity and synergy.
(44)
Given the need for urgent action within the Union, the EIB and the EIF may have financed additional projects outside of their usual profile during the course of 2015 and until the entry into force of this Regulation, the conclusion of the EFSI Agreement and the first appointments of all of the members of the Investment Committee and of the Managing Director. In order to maximise the benefit of the measures provided for in this Regulation, it should be possible for such additional projects to be included within the EU guarantee coverage in the event that they fulfil the substantive criteria set out in this Regulation.
(45)
EIB financing and investment operations supported by the EFSI should be managed in accordance with the EIB's own rules and procedures, including appropriate control measures and measures taken to avoid tax evasion, as well as with the relevant rules and procedures concerning the European Anti-Fraud Office (OLAF) and the Court of Auditors, including the Tripartite agreement between the European Commission, the European Court of Auditors and the European Investment Bank of 27 October 2003.
(46)
Recalling that the audit work of the Court of Auditors constitutes an important basis for the discharge procedure of Article 319 TFEU, full respect for the audit rights of the Court of Auditors as laid down in Article 287 TFEU should be ensured in the application of this Regulation.
(47)
The EIB should regularly evaluate and report on operations supported by the EFSI with a view to assessing their relevance, performance and impact, including their additionality and added value, as well as to identifying aspects that could improve future activities. Such evaluations and reporting should be made public and contribute to accountability and analysis of sustainability.
(48)
When implementing the investment guidelines and other relevant rules under this Regulation, the Investment Committee should take full account of the need to prevent any kind of discrimination, especially as regards accessibility for persons with disabilities. It should in particular take into account gender equality and mainstreaming.
(49)
Alongside the financing and investment operations that will be conducted through the EFSI, a European investment advisory hub (EIAH) should be created. The EIAH should provide strengthened support for project development and preparation across the Union, by building on the expertise of the Commission, the EIB, national promotional banks or institutions and the managing authorities of the European Structural and Investment Funds. A single point of entry for questions relating to technical assistance for investments within the Union should be established and technical assistance provided to project promoters at local level should be enhanced. The new services provided by the EIAH should be in addition to those already available under other Union programmes, thus in no way affecting the level and the capacity of the support provided under those programmes. Those additional services should be adequately funded. The EIAH should provide expertise free of charge for public project promoters in order to ensure fair access to EFSI financing across the Union. Where possible, the EIAH should work closely with similar structures at national, regional or sub-national level. The fees charged to SMEs for the technical assistance provided by the EIAH in addition to existing Union programmes should be capped at one third of their cost. The EIB should also submit to the European Parliament, to the Council and to the Commission by 1 September 2016, and annually thereafter, a report on the fees received and the services provided by the EIAH, so as to allow an effective assessment of the financing needs, within the limits of the annual ceiling of EUR 20 000 000.
(50)
The EIAH should in particular build upon good practices in existing programmes, such as ELENA (European Local ENergy Assistance), EEEF (European Energy Efficiency Fund), JEREMIE (Joint European Resources for Micro to Medium Enterprises), JASPERS (Joint Assistance to Support Projects in European Regions), JESSICA (Joint European Support for Sustainable Investment in City Areas) and JASMINE (Joint Action to Support Micro-finance Institutions in Europe).
(51)
In order to cover the risks relating to the EU guarantee to the EIB, a guarantee fund (guarantee fund) should be established. The guarantee fund should be constituted by a gradual payment from the general budget of the Union. The guarantee fund should subsequently also receive revenues from projects that benefit from EFSI support and amounts recovered from defaulting debtors where the guarantee fund has already honoured the guarantee to the EIB. Any surplus in the guarantee fund resulting from an adjustment of the target amount or from remunerations in excess of the target amount after a full reloading of the EU guarantee up to its initial amount of EUR 16 000 000 000 should be returned to the general budget of the Union as internal assigned revenue, in order to replenish any budget lines which may have been used as source of redeployment to the guarantee fund.
(52)
The guarantee fund is intended to provide a liquidity cushion for the general budget of the Union against losses incurred by the EFSI in pursuit of its objectives. Experience on the nature of investments to be supported by the EFSI indicates that the level of resources in the guarantee fund should represent a ratio of 50 % of the total EU guarantee obligations.
(53)
All payments to the guarantee fund and budget decisions otherwise associated with the operation of the EFSI should be fully consistent with the terms of the multiannual financial framework and authorised by the European Parliament and the Council through the annual budgetary procedure.
(54)
In order to partly finance the contribution from the general budget of the Union, the available envelopes of Horizon 2020, and of the Connecting Europe Facility, provided for in Regulation (EU) No 1316/2013, should be reduced.
(55)
Within the Union, there is a significant number of potentially viable projects, from an economic and technical point of view, that are not being financed due to a lack of certainty and transparency with respect to such projects. Often this is because private investors are not aware of the projects or have insufficient information to make an assessment of the investment risks, including regulatory risks. The Commission with the support of the EIB should promote the creation of a transparent portal of current and future projects in the Union which are suitable for investment (European investment project portal - EIPP). The EIPP should ensure that information regarding investment projects is made publicly available on a regular and structured basis so as to ensure that investors have access to transparent and reliable information with due regard to the protection of business secrets.
(56)
Member States, in cooperation with regional and local authorities, should be able to contribute to the establishment and management of the EIPP including by providing information on investment projects in their territory to the Commission. Before launching the EIPP, the Commission, with the participation of the EIB, should carry out appropriate consultations with Member States, experts and stakeholders, regarding the principles and guidelines for projects to be listed in the EIPP, including mechanisms to prevent projects which could undermine national security from being published, and regarding the template for publishing information about individual projects.
(57)
The EIPP should include projects across the Union for the purpose of visibility to investors and for information purposes. It should be possible to include projects that are capable of being fully financed by the private sector or with the assistance of other instruments provided at Union or national level. Inclusion of a project in the EIPP should neither imply nor exclude any public financial support, either at Union or national level.
(58)
In order to ensure accountability to European citizens, the EIB should regularly report to the European Parliament and the Council on the progress, impact and operations of the EFSI, in particular as regards the additionality of operations conducted under the EFSI compared to EIB normal operations, including special activities. At the request of the European Parliament, the Chairperson of the Steering Board and the Managing Director should participate in hearings and reply to questions within a fixed period. The Commission should regularly report on the situation of the guarantee fund.
(59)
In order to facilitate a prompt and flexible adaptation of non-essential elements of the investment guidelines laid down in Annex II to this Regulation to market conditions and the investment environment within the Union or parts of it, the power to adopt acts in accordance with Article 290 TFEU should be delegated to the Commission with respect to the amendment of the relevant parts of those investment guidelines without deleting any of the sections of those guidelines altogether. The power to adopt acts in accordance with Article 290 TFEU should be delegated to the Commission with respect to the establishment of a scoreboard of indicators to be used by the Investment Committee to ensure an independent and transparent assessment of the potential and actual use of the EU guarantee. Given the unique nature of the EFSI and the central role of the EIB in its set-up, it is appropriate that the Commission pursues a close dialogue with the EIB in the context of the adoption of the scoreboard and of any adjustment to the investment guidelines and to the scoreboard. The Commission, when preparing and drawing up delegated acts, should ensure a simultaneous, timely and appropriate transmission of relevant documents to the European Parliament and to the Council.
(60)
The unique features of the EFSI require exceptional efforts with a view to the entry into force of the delegated act that first establishes the scoreboard. At the same time, the effectiveness of the European Parliament's and the Council's rights to object as provided for in this Regulation in accordance with Article 290(2) TFEU should be ensured. Therefore, the objection period for the delegated act that first establishes the scoreboard should be exceptionally three weeks, which can be prolonged by three weeks at the initiative of the European Parliament or of the Council. The Commission should take into account this objection period, as well as the procedures in the European Parliament and the Council, as regards the date of transmission of that delegated act.
(61)
While following EIB pricing principles, the pricing levels for EFSI operations should take due account of market failures and gaps and the need to stimulate additional investment. EFSI revenues attributed to the EU guarantee should contribute to the budgetary backing for the EU guarantee.
(62)
The Commission and the EIB should conclude an agreement that specifies the conditions laid down in this Regulation for their management of the EFSI. That agreement should not encroach upon the competences of the Union legislator, of the budgetary authority, or of the EIB, as laid down in the Treaties, and should, therefore, be confined to elements which are mainly technical and administrative in nature and which, whilst not being essential, are necessary for the effective implementation of the EFSI.
(63)
Since the objectives of this Regulation, namely to support investments in the Union and to ensure increased access to financing for entities, cannot, as far as financial constraints to investment are concerned, be sufficiently achieved by the Member States by reason of the disparities in their fiscal capacity to finance investment but can rather, by reason of its scale and effects, be better achieved at Union level, the Union may adopt measures, in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity as set out in Article 5 TEU. In accordance with the principle of proportionality, as set out in that Article, this Regulation does not go beyond what is necessary in order to achieve those objectives,
HAVE ADOPTED THIS REGULATION:
