Article 7
Governance of the EFSI
1.   When carrying out their tasks under this Regulation, the Steering Board, the Investment Committee and the Managing Director shall pursue only the objectives set out in this Regulation.
2.   The EFSI Agreement shall provide that the EFSI is to be governed by a steering board, which, for the purpose of the use of the EU guarantee, is to determine, in conformity with the general objectives set out in Article 9(2):
(a)
the strategic orientation of the EFSI, including the allocation of the EU guarantee within the infrastructure and innovation windows and any decision to be taken under Article 11(3) and Section 7(b) of Annex II;
(b)
the operating policies and procedures necessary for the functioning of the EFSI;
(c)
the rules applicable to the operations with investment platforms and national promotional banks or institutions;
(d)
the risk profile of the EFSI.
3.   The Steering Board shall comprise four members: three appointed by the Commission and one by the EIB. The Steering Board shall elect a Chairperson from among its members for a fixed term of three years, renewable once. The Steering Board shall take its decisions by consensus.
The minutes of Steering Board meetings shall be published as soon as they have been approved by the Steering Board.
The Steering Board shall regularly organise a consultation of relevant stakeholders - in particular co-investors, public authorities, experts, education, training and research institutions, the relevant social partners and representatives of civil society - on the orientation and implementation of the investment policy carried out by the EIB under this Regulation.
The instruments used by the EIF for carrying out operations covered by this Regulation shall be approved jointly by the Steering Board and the Managing Director, after consulting the Investment Committee.
4.   Member States and other third parties may - subject in the case of other third parties to the agreement of the Steering Board - contribute to the EFSI in the form of guarantees or cash as regards Member States, and only in the form of cash as regards other third parties. Neither Member States nor other third parties shall be granted membership of the Steering Board, nor shall they be granted a role in the appointment of other EFSI staff including members of the Investment Committee, nor shall they have any right concerning other aspects of governance of the EFSI as set out in this Regulation.
5.   The EFSI Agreement shall provide that the EFSI is to have a managing director, who is to be responsible for the day-to-day management of the EFSI and the preparation and chairing of meetings of the Investment Committee referred to in paragraph 6.
The Managing Director shall be assisted by a deputy managing director. The Managing Director shall report every quarter on the activities of the EFSI to the Steering Board.
6.   Following an open and transparent selection process in line with EIB procedures, the Steering Board shall select a candidate for each of the positions of Managing Director and Deputy Managing Director.
The European Parliament and the Council shall be kept duly informed in a timely manner at all stages of the selection procedure, subject to strict confidentiality requirements. That applies regardless of the conclusion of the agreement between the European Parliament and the EIB referred to in Article 17(5).
The European Parliament shall organise as rapidly as possible, and at the latest within four weeks from the communication of the name of a selected candidate, a hearing with the candidate for each position.
Following the approval from the European Parliament, the Managing Director and the Deputy Managing Director shall be appointed by the President of the EIB for a fixed term of three years, renewable once.
7.   The EFSI Agreement shall provide that the EFSI is to have an investment committee, which is to be responsible for examining potential projects in line with the EFSI investment policies and for approving the support of the EU guarantee for EIB operations for projects that comply with the requirements of Articles 6 and 9, irrespective of the geographic location, in accordance with Article 8, of such projects. Furthermore, the Investment Committee shall be the competent body for approving operations with investment platforms and national promotional banks or institutions.
8.   The Investment Committee shall be composed of eight independent experts and the Managing Director. The experts of the Investment Committee shall, following an open and transparent selection procedure, be appointed by the Steering Board for a fixed term of up to three years. Their term shall be renewable but shall not exceed six years in total. The independent experts shall have a high level of relevant market experience in project structuring and project financing, as well as micro- and macro-economic expertise.
When appointing the experts of the Investment Committee, the Steering Board shall ensure that the composition of the Investment Committee is diversified, so as to ensure that it has a wide knowledge of the sectors referred to in Article 9 and of the geographic markets in the Union.
The composition of the Investment Committee shall be gender-balanced. The Steering Board shall strive to select experts having experience in investment in one or more of the following fields:
(a)
research, development and innovation;
(b)
transport infrastructures and innovative technologies for transport;
(c)
energy infrastructures, energy efficiency and renewable energy;
(d)
information and communication technologies infrastructures;
(e)
environmental protection and management;
(f)
education and training;
(g)
health and medicine;
(h)
SMEs;
(i)
cultural and creative industries;
(j)
urban mobility;
(k)
social infrastructures and the social and solidarity economy.
9.   When participating in the activities of the Investment Committee, its members shall perform their duties impartially and in the interests of the EFSI. When implementing the investment guidelines set out in Annex II and taking decisions on the use of the EU guarantee, they shall not seek or take instructions from the EIB, the institutions of the Union, Member States, or any other public or private body. Without prejudice to the provision of analytical, logistical and administrative support by the staff of the EIB to the Investment Committee, adequate organisational arrangements shall be established and maintained to ensure the operational independence of the Investment Committee. Any project assessment conducted by EIB staff shall not be binding on the Investment Committee for the purposes of granting the EU guarantee.
10.   CVs and declarations of interest of each member of the Investment Committee shall be made public and constantly updated. Each member of the Investment Committee shall communicate without delay to the Steering Board all information needed to check on an ongoing basis the absence of any conflict of interest.
11.   Following a request from the Steering Board, the contract of any member of the Investment Committee who breaches the obligations set out in paragraphs 9 and 10 shall be terminated, in accordance with applicable employment and labour law rules.
12.   The Investment Committee shall decide on the use of the EU guarantee in accordance with this Regulation, including the investment guidelines set out in Annex II.
Decisions of the Investment Committee shall be taken by simple majority. Decisions approving the use of the EU guarantee shall be public and accessible.
The EIB shall submit twice a year to the European Parliament, the Council and the Commission a list of all decisions of the Investment Committee rejecting the use of the EU guarantee, subject to strict confidentiality requirements.
13.   The Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 23 to amend the non-essential elements of Sections 6 to 8 of the investment guidelines laid down in Annex II to this Regulation, without deleting any of those Sections altogether. Such delegated acts shall be prepared in close dialogue with the EIB.
14.   The Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 23(1) to (3) and (5) to supplement this Regulation by establishing a scoreboard of indicators to be used by the Investment Committee to ensure an independent and transparent assessment of the potential and actual use of the EU guarantee. Such delegated acts shall be prepared in close dialogue with the EIB.
