Article 16
Reporting and accounting
1.   The EIB, in cooperation with the EIF where appropriate, shall submit every six months a report to the Commission on EIB financing and investment operations covered by this Regulation. The report shall include an assessment of compliance with the requirements on the use of the EU guarantee and with the key performance indicators referred to in Article 4(2)(f)(iv). The report shall also include statistical, financial and accounting data on each EIB financing and investment operation and on an aggregated basis.
2.   The EIB, in cooperation with the EIF where appropriate, shall submit an annual report to the European Parliament and to the Council on EIB financing and investment operations covered by this Regulation. The report shall be made public and shall include:
(a)
an assessment of EIB financing and investment operations at operation, sector, country and regional levels and their compliance with this Regulation, in particular with the criterion of providing additionality, together with an assessment of the allocation of EIB financing and investment operations between the general objectives set out in Article 9(2);
(b)
an assessment of the added value, the mobilisation of private sector resources, the estimated and actual outputs and the outcomes and impact of EIB financing and investment operations on an aggregated basis, including the impact on employment creation;
(c)
an assessment of the extent to which operations covered by this Regulation contribute to the achievement of the general objectives set out in Article 9(2) including an assessment of the level of EFSI investments in the areas of research, development and innovation and transport (including TEN-T and urban mobility), telecommunications, energy infrastructure and energy efficiency;
(d)
an assessment of the compliance with the requirements concerning the use of the EU guarantee and with the key performance indicators referred to in Article 4(2)(f)(iv);
(e)
an assessment of the leverage effect achieved by EFSI-supported projects;
(f)
a description of the projects where the support of the European Structural and Investment Funds is combined with the support of the EFSI, and the total amount of the contributions from each source;
(g)
the financial amount transferred to beneficiaries and an assessment of EIB financing and investment operations on an aggregated basis;
(h)
an assessment of the added value of EIB financing and investment operations, and of the aggregate risk associated with those operations;
(i)
detailed information on calls on the EU guarantee, losses, returns, amounts recovered and any other payments received;
(j)
the financial reports on EIB financing and investment operations covered by this Regulation audited by an independent external auditor.
3.   For the purposes of the Commission's accounting, its reporting of the risks covered by the EU guarantee and its management of the guarantee fund, the EIB, in cooperation with the EIF where appropriate, shall provide the Commission and the Court of Auditors annually with:
(a)
the risk assessment of the EIB and of the EIF and grading information concerning EIB financing and investment operations covered by this Regulation;
(b)
the outstanding financial obligation for the Union arising from the EU guarantee provided towards EIB financing and investment operations covered by this Regulation, broken down by individual operations;
(c)
the total profits or losses deriving from EIB financing and investment operations within the portfolios referred to in Article 4(2)(c)(i).
4.   The EIB – where appropriate in cooperation with the EIF – shall, upon request, provide to the Commission any additional information necessary to fulfil the Commission's obligations in relation to this Regulation.
5.   The EIB and, where appropriate, the EIF shall provide the information referred to in paragraphs 1 to 4 at their own expense.
6.   By 31 March of each year, the Commission shall submit to the European Parliament, to the Council and to the Court of Auditors, in the context of the financial statements of the Commission, the required information on the situation of the guarantee fund. In addition, it shall, by 31 May of each year, submit to the European Parliament, to the Council and to the Court of Auditors an annual report on the management of the guarantee fund in the previous calendar year, including an assessment of the adequacy of the target amount and the level of the guarantee fund and of the need for its replenishment. The annual report shall contain the presentation of the financial position of the guarantee fund at the end of the previous calendar year, the financial flows during the previous calendar year as well as the significant transactions and any relevant information on the financial accounts. The report shall also include information about the financial management, the performance and the risk of the guarantee fund at the end of the previous calendar year.
