Article 5
Global resources and implementation
1.   The global resources for the implementation of the Instrument shall be EUR 2 760 million in current prices.
2.   Annual appropriations shall be authorised by the European Parliament and the Council within the limits of the multiannual financial framework.
3.   The global resources shall be implemented through the following means:
(a)
national programmes, in accordance with Articles 9 and 12;
(b)
operating support, within the framework of the national programmes and under the conditions laid down in Article 10;
(c)
the Special Transit Scheme, in accordance with Article 11;
(d)
Union actions, in accordance with Article 13;
(e)
emergency assistance, in accordance with Article 14;
(f)
the implementation of a programme for setting up IT systems supporting the management of migration flows across the external borders under the conditions laid down in Article 15;
(g)
technical assistance in accordance with Article 16.
4.   The budget allocated under the Instrument to Union actions referred to in Article 13 of this Regulation, to the emergency assistance referred to in Article 14 of this Regulation and to the technical assistance referred to in Article 16(1) of this Regulation shall be implemented under direct management in accordance with point (a) of Article 58(1) of Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council (27) and, where appropriate, under indirect management in accordance with point (c) of Article 58(1) of Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012.
The budget allocated to the national programmes referred to in Article 9, to the operating support referred to in Article 10 and to the functioning of the Special Transit Scheme referred to in Article 11 shall be implemented under shared management in accordance with point (b) of Article 58(1) of Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012.
The budget allocated to countries associated with the implementation, application and development of the Schengen acquis referred to in paragraph 7 of this Article shall be implemented under indirect management in accordance with point (c)(i) of Article 58(1) of Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012.
The method(s) of implementation of the budget for the programme on the development of IT systems, based on existing and/or new IT systems, shall be set out in the relevant Union legislative acts subject to their adoption.
5.   The global resources shall be used as follows:
(a)
EUR 1 551 million for the national programmes of Member States;
(b)
EUR 791 million for developing IT systems, based on existing and/or new IT systems, supporting the management of migration flows across the external borders, subject to the adoption of the relevant Union legislative acts;
Where that amount is not allocated or spent, the Commission shall, by means of a delegated act in accordance with Article 17, re-allocate it to one or more of the activities referred to in points (b) and (c) of Article 6(1)and point (d) of this paragraph. That delegated act shall include an assessment of the evolution of the relevant IT systems including the implementation of the budget and expected unspent amounts. That re-allocation may take place following the adoption of the relevant legislative acts or on the occasion of the mid-term review referred to in Article 8.
(c)
EUR 154 million for the Special Transit Scheme;
(d)
EUR 264 million for Union actions, emergency assistance and technical assistance at the initiative of the Commission, of which at least 30 % shall be used for Union actions.
6.   Jointly with the global resources established for Regulation (EU) No 513/2014, the global resources available for the Instrument, as established in paragraph 1, constitute the financial envelope for the Fund and serve as the prime reference, within the meaning of point 17 of the Interinstitutional Agreement of 2 December 2013 between the European Parliament, the Council and the Commission on budgetary discipline, on cooperation in budgetary matters and on sound financial management (28), for the European Parliament and the Council during the annual budgetary procedure.
7.   The countries associated with the implementation, application and development of the Schengen acquis shall participate in the Instrument in accordance with this Regulation.
Arrangements shall be concluded on the financial contributions by those countries to the Instrument and the supplementary rules necessary for such participation, including provisions ensuring the protection of the Union’s financial interests and the power of audit of the Court of Auditors.
The financial contributions from those countries shall be added to the global resources available from the Union budget referred to in paragraph 1.
