Article 6
Resources for eligible actions in the Member States
1.   EUR 1 551 million shall be allocated to the Member States indicatively as follows:
(a)
EUR 1 276 million, as indicated in Annex I;
(b)
EUR 147 million, based on the results of the mechanism referred to in Article 7;
(c)
in the framework of the mid-term review referred to in Article 8 and for the period as of budget year 2018, EUR 128 million, the remainder of the available appropriations under this Article or another amount, as determined pursuant to paragraph 4, based on the results of the risk analysis and the mid-term review.
2.   Each Member State shall allocate the basic amounts for national programmes indicated in Annex I as follows:
(a)
at least 10 % for actions relating to point (a) of Article 9(2);
(b)
at least 25 % for actions relating to point (b) of Article 9(2);
(c)
at least 5 % for actions relating to points (c), (d), (e) and (f) of Article 9(2).
Member States may depart from those minimum percentages provided that an explanation is included in the national programme as to why allocating resources below those minima does not jeopardise the achievement of the relevant objective. That explanation will be assessed by the Commission in the context of its approval of national programmes as referred to in Article 9(2).
3.   Member States shall devote the necessary funding to Eurosur in order to ensure its good functioning.
4.   To address properly the objectives of the Instrument in the event of unforeseen or new circumstances and/or to ensure the effective implementation of funding available under the Instrument, the Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 17 to adjust the indicative amount laid down in point (c) of paragraph 1 of this Article.
5.   Member States which accede to the Union in the period 2012-2020 shall not benefit from allocations for national programmes under the Instrument as long as they benefit from a temporary instrument of the Union which supports the beneficiary Member States to finance actions at new external borders for the implementation of the Schengen acquis on borders and visas and external border control.
