Whereas:
(1)
The Union’s objective of ensuring a high level of security within an area of freedom, security and justice pursuant to Article 67(3) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the Union (TFEU) should be achieved, inter alia, through common measures on the crossing of internal borders by persons and on border controls at external borders and the common visa policy as part of a convergent multi-layer system, which would allow the exchange of data and a complete situation awareness and which aims to facilitate legitimate travel and to tackle illegal immigration.
(2)
The Union needs a more coherent approach to the internal and external aspects of migration management and internal security, and should establish a correlation between the fight against illegal immigration and the improvement of the security of the external borders of the Union, and better cooperation and dialogue with third countries for the purposes of dealing with illegal immigration and promoting legal migration.
(3)
It is necessary to develop an integrated approach to issues arising from the pressure of migration and asylum applications and for the management of the external borders of the Union, and to provide a budget and adequate resources to cope with emergencies in a spirit of respect for human rights and solidarity between all Member States, while remaining aware of national responsibilities and ensuring a clear division of tasks.
(4)
The Internal Security Strategy for the European Union (the ‘Internal Security Strategy’), adopted by the Council in February 2010, constitutes a shared agenda for tackling these common security challenges. The Commission Communication of November 2010, entitled ‘The EU Internal Security Strategy in Action’, translates the strategy’s principles and guidelines into concrete actions by identifying five strategic objectives: to disrupt international crime networks, to prevent terrorism and address radicalisation and recruitment, to raise levels of security for citizens and businesses in cyberspace, to strengthen security through border management and to increase Europe’s resilience in the face of crises and disasters.
(5)
According to the Internal Security Strategy, freedom, security and justice are objectives that should be pursued in parallel, and in order to achieve freedom and justice, security should always be pursued in accordance with the principles of the Treaties, the rule of law and the Union’s fundamental rights obligations.
(6)
Solidarity among Member States, clarity about the division of tasks, respect for fundamental freedoms and human rights and the rule of law, a strong focus on the global perspective and the link with external security, and consistency and coherence with the Union foreign policy objectives, as laid down in Article 21 of the Treaty on European Union (TEU), should be key principles guiding the implementation of the Internal Security Strategy.
(7)
To promote the implementation of the Internal Security Strategy and to ensure that it becomes an operational reality, Member States should be provided with adequate Union financial support by setting up an Internal Security Fund (‘the Fund’).
(8)
Due to the legal particularities applicable to Title V TFEU, it is not legally possible to establish the Fund as a single financial instrument. The Fund should therefore be established as a comprehensive framework for Union financial support in the field of internal security comprising the instrument for financial support for external borders and visa (‘the Instrument’) established by this Regulation as well as the instrument for financial support for police cooperation, preventing and combating crime, and crisis management established by Regulation (EU) No 513/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council (4). This comprehensive framework should be complemented by Regulation (EU) No 514/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council (5) to which this Regulation should refer as regards rules on programming, financial management, management and control, clearance of accounts, closure of programmes and reporting and evaluation.
(9)
The new two-pillar structure of funding in the field of home affairs should contribute to the simplification, rationalisation, consolidation and transparency of funding in that field. Synergies, consistency and complementarity should be sought with other funds and programmes, including with a view to allocating funding to common objectives. However, overlap between the different funding instruments should be avoided.
(10)
The Fund should reflect the need for increased flexibility and simplification while respecting requirements in terms of predictability, and ensuring a fair and transparent distribution of resources to meet the general and specific objectives laid down in this Regulation.
(11)
Efficiency of measures and quality of spending constitute guiding principles in the implementation of the Fund. Furthermore, the Fund should also be implemented in the most effective and user-friendly manner possible.
(12)
The Fund should take special account of those Member States which are facing disproportionate burdens from migratory flows due to their geographical location.
(13)
Solidarity and responsibility-sharing between Member States and the Union is a fundamental component of the common policy for the management of the external borders.
(14)
The Fund should express solidarity through financial assistance to those Member States that fully apply the Schengen provisions on external borders as well as to those which are preparing for full participation in Schengen, and should be used by the Member States in the interests of the Union’s common policy for the management of the external borders.
(15)
In order to contribute to the achievement of the general objective of the Fund, Member States should ensure that their national programmes address the specific objectives of the Instrument and that the allocation of resources between objectives is proportionate to the challenges and needs and ensures that the objectives can be met. Where a national programme does not address one of the specific objectives or the allocation is below the minimum percentages for some objectives of the national programmes set in this Regulation, the Member State concerned should provide a justification within the programme.
(16)
In order to measure the achievements of the Fund, common indicators should be established in relation to each specific objective of the Instrument. The measurement of the achievement of the specific objectives by means of common indicators does not render the implementation of actions related to those indicators mandatory.
(17)
Participation by a Member State should not coincide with its participation in a temporary financial instrument of the Union which supports the beneficiary Member States to finance, inter alia, actions at new external borders of the Union for the implementation of the Schengen acquis on borders and visas and external border control.
(18)
The Instrument should build on the capacity-building process developed with the assistance of the External Borders Fund for the period 2007-2013, established by Decision No 574/2007/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (6), and should extend it to take into account new developments.
(19)
When executing tasks at external borders and consulates in accordance with the Schengen acquis on borders and visas, Member States carry out activities in the interests of and on behalf of all other Member States in the Schengen area, thus performing a public service for the Union. The Instrument should contribute to supporting operating costs related to border control and visa policy and enable Member States to maintain capabilities which are crucial for that service for all. Such support consists of full reimbursement of a choice of specific costs related to the objectives under the Instrument and should form an integral part of the national programmes.
(20)
The Instrument should complement and reinforce the activities undertaken to develop operational cooperation under the aegis of the European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders of the Member States of the European Union (‘the Frontex Agency’) as established by Council Regulation (EC) No 2007/2004 (7), including the new activities resulting from the amendments introduced by Regulation (EU) No 1168/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council (8), and thereby further reinforce solidarity between those Member States controlling external borders in the interests and on behalf of the Schengen area as a whole. This means, inter alia, that, when drawing up their national programmes, Member States should take into account the analytical tools and operational and technical guidelines developed by the Frontex Agency as well as the training curricula developed, namely the common core curricula for the training of border guards, including its components with regard to fundamental rights and access to international protection. In order to develop complementarity between its mission and the responsibilities of the Member States for the control and surveillance of external borders as well as to ensure consistency and to avoid cost inefficiency, the Frontex Agency should be consulted by the Commission on draft national programmes submitted by the Member States, and in particular on the activities financed under the operating support.
(21)
The Instrument should be implemented in full compliance with the rights and principles enshrined in the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union and with the Union’s international obligations, and without prejudice to the application of special provisions concerning the right to asylum and to international protection.
(22)
Uniform and high-quality external border control is essential for strengthening the area of freedom, security and justice. In accordance with common Union standards, the Instrument should support measures relating to the management of external borders, to be implemented in accordance with the four-tier access control model which comprises measures in third countries, cooperation with neighbouring countries, border control measures and control measures within the area of free movement in order to prevent illegal immigration and cross-border crime inside the Schengen area.
(23)
Pursuant to Article 3 TEU, the Instrument should support activities which ensure the protection of children at risk of harm at the external borders. In particular, when implementing actions in relation to the identification, immediate assistance and referral to protection services, Member States should, wherever possible, give special attention to vulnerable persons, in particular children and unaccompanied minors.
(24)
To ensure a uniform and high-quality external border control and to facilitate legitimate travel across external borders within the framework of the Internal Security Strategy, the Instrument should contribute to the development of a European common integrated border management system. That system includes all the measures involving policy, law, systematic cooperation, burden sharing, assessment of the situation and changing circumstances regarding crossing points for irregular migrants, personnel, equipment and technology taken at different levels by the competent authorities of the Member States, acting in cooperation with the Frontex Agency, with third countries and, where necessary, with other actors, in particular Europol and the Agency for the Operational Management of Large-Scale IT-Systems, utilising, inter alia, the four-tier border security model and integrated risk analysis of the Union.
(25)
In accordance with Protocol No 5 to the 2003 Act of Accession on the transit of persons by land between the region of Kaliningrad and other parts of the Russian Federation, the Instrument should bear any additional cost incurred in implementing the specific provisions of the Union acquis covering such transit, i.e. Council Regulation (EC) No 693/2003 (9) and Council Regulation (EC) No 694/2003 (10). The need for continued financial support for foregone fees, however, should be dependent upon the visa regime of the Union in force with the Russian Federation.
(26)
The Instrument should include support for national measures and cooperation between Member States in the area of visa policy and other pre-frontier activities that take place prior to external border controls and should make full use of the Visa Information System (VIS). The efficient management of activities organised by the services of the Member States in third countries is in the interests of the common visa policy as part of a multi-layered system aimed at facilitating legitimate travel and tackling illegal immigration into the Union, and constitutes an integral part of the common integrated border management system.
(27)
Moreover, the Instrument should support measures in the territory of the Schengen countries as part of the development of a common integrated border management system which strengthens the overall functioning of the Schengen area.
(28)
The Instrument should also support the development by the Union of IT systems, based on existing and/or new IT systems, which would equip Member States with the tools to manage the movement of third-country nationals across borders more efficiently and to ensure a better identification and verification of travellers, thereby facilitating travel and enhancing border security. To that end, a programme, in keeping with the Information Management Strategy for EU internal security, should be established with the aim of covering costs for the development of both the central and national components of such systems, ensuring technical consistency, interoperability with other Union IT systems, cost savings and a smooth implementation in the Member States. Those IT systems should comply with fundamental rights, including the protection of personal data.
(29)
Member States should devote the necessary funding to the European Border Surveillance System (Eurosur), established by Regulation (EU) No 1052/2013 of the European Parliament and the Council (11), in order to ensure the good functioning of that system.
(30)
To address immediately unforeseen migratory pressure and risks to border security, it should be possible to provide emergency assistance in accordance with the framework set out in Regulation (EU) No 514/2014.
(31)
Moreover, in the interests of enhanced solidarity in the Schengen area as a whole, where weaknesses or possible risks are identified, in particular following a Schengen evaluation, the Member State concerned should follow the matter up adequately by using resources under its national programme by priority, where applicable, complementing emergency assistance measures.
(32)
To reinforce solidarity and responsibility-sharing, Member States should be encouraged to use part of the resources available under their national programmes for specific priorities defined by the Union, such as the purchase of technical equipment needed by the Frontex Agency and the development of consular cooperation for the Union. There is a need to maximise the impact of Union funding by mobilising, pooling and leveraging public and private financial resources. Utmost transparency, accountability and democratic scrutiny should be ensured for innovative financial instruments and mechanisms that involve the Union budget.
(33)
To safeguard the application of the Schengen acquis throughout the Schengen area, the implementation of Council Regulation (EU) No 1053/2013 (12) should also be supported under the Instrument, as an essential tool to facilitate the implementation of Union policies in the area of freedom, justice and security by ensuring a high level of external border protection and the absence of border controls within the Schengen area.
(34)
In light of the experience gained with the External Borders Fund and the development of the SIS II and VIS, it is considered appropriate to allow for a certain degree of flexibility regarding possible transfers of resources between the different means of implementation of the objectives pursued under the Instrument, without prejudice to the principle of ensuring from the start a critical mass and financial stability for the programmes and the operating support for Member States and without prejudice to the scrutiny by the European Parliament and the Council.
(35)
In the same vein, the scope of the actions and the ceiling for resources which remain available to the Union (‘Union actions’) should be increased to enhance the capacity of the Union to carry out, in a given budget year, multiple activities for the management of external borders and the common visa policy in the interests of the Union as a whole, when and insofar as the needs arise. Such Union actions include studies and pilot projects to further the management of external borders and the common visa policy and their application, the training of border guards in the protection of human rights, measures or arrangements in third countries addressing migratory pressures from those countries in the interests of an optimal management of migration flows into the Union and of an efficient organisation of the related tasks at external borders and consulates.
(36)
Measures in, and in relation to, third countries supported through the Instrument should be taken in synergy and coherence with other actions outside the Union, supported through geographic and thematic Union external assistance instruments. In particular, in implementing such actions, full coherence should be sought with the principles and general objectives of the Union’s external action and foreign policy related to the country or region in question. They should not be intended to support actions which are directly development-oriented and they should complement, when appropriate, the financial assistance provided through external aid instruments. Coherence will also be sought with the Union’s humanitarian policy, in particular as regards the implementation of emergency measures.
(37)
Funding from the Union budget should concentrate on activities where Union intervention can bring added value compared with action by Member States alone. As the Union is in a better position than Member States to provide a framework for expressing Union solidarity in border control, visa policy and the management of migration flows, and to provide a platform for the development of common IT systems underpinning those policies, financial support provided under this Regulation will contribute in particular to strengthening national and Union capabilities in those areas.
(38)
This Regulation should establish the allocation of basic amounts to Member States. The basic amount for each Member State should be calculated on the basis of the External Borders Fund allocations for each Member State in the years 2010-2012 and by dividing the figure obtained by the total of the appropriations available for shared management for those three years. The calculations were made in accordance with the distribution criteria laid down in Decision No 574/2007/EC.
(39)
The Commission should monitor the implementation of the Instrument, in accordance with the relevant provisions of Regulation (EU) No 514/2014, with the aid of key indicators for evaluating results and impacts. The indicators, including relevant baselines, should provide the minimum basis for evaluating the extent to which the objectives of the Instrument have been achieved.
(40)
In order to supplement or amend provisions in this Regulation regarding the definition of specific actions under the national programmes, the power to adopt acts in accordance with Article 290 TFEU should be delegated to the Commission. It is of particular importance that the Commission carry out appropriate consultations during its preparatory work, including at expert level. The Commission, when preparing and drawing-up delegated acts, should ensure a simultaneous, timely and appropriate transmission of relevant documents to the European Parliament and to the Council.
(41)
In the application of this Regulation, including the preparation of delegated acts, the Commission should consult experts from all Member States.
(42)
In order to ensure a uniform, efficient and timely application of the provisions on operating support laid down in this Regulation, implementing powers should be conferred on the Commission. Those powers should be exercised in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council (13).
(43)
Since the objective of this Regulation, namely to provide for solidarity and responsibility sharing between Member States and the Union in the management of external borders and visa policy, cannot be sufficiently achieved by the Member States but can rather be better achieved at Union level, the Union may adopt measures, in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity as set out in Article 5 TEU. In accordance with the principle of proportionality, as set out in that Article, this Regulation does not go beyond what is necessary in order to achieve that objective.
(44)
Decision No 574/2007/EC should be repealed, subject to the transitional provisions set out in this Regulation.
(45)
As regards Iceland and Norway, this Regulation constitutes a development of the Schengen acquis within the meaning of the Agreement concluded by the Council of the European Union and the Republic of Iceland and the Kingdom of Norway concerning the latters’ association with the implementation, application and development of the Schengen acquis (14) which falls within the areas referred to in Article 1, Points A and B of Council Decision 1999/437/EC (15).
(46)
As regards Switzerland, this Regulation constitutes a development of provisions of the Schengen acquis within the meaning of the Agreement between the European Union, the European Community and the Swiss Confederation on the Swiss Confederation’s association with the implementation, application and development of the Schengen acquis (16) which fall within the area referred to in Article 1, Points A and B of Decision 1999/437/EC read in conjunction with Article 3 of Council Decision 2008/146/EC (17).
(47)
As regards Liechtenstein, this Regulation constitutes a development of the provisions of the Schengen acquis within the meaning of the Protocol between the European Union, the European Community, the Swiss Confederation and the Principality of Liechtenstein on the accession of the Principality of Liechtenstein to the Agreement between the European Union, the European Community and the Swiss Confederation on the Swiss Confederation’s association with the implementation, application and development of the Schengen (18) which fall within the area referred to in Article 1, Points A and B of Decision 1999/437/EC read in conjunction with Article 3 of Council Decision 2011/350/EU (19).
(48)
In accordance with Articles 1 and 2 of Protocol No 22 on the position of Denmark, annexed to TEU and TFEU, Denmark is not taking part in the adoption of this Regulation and is not bound by it or subject to its application. Given that this Regulation builds upon the Schengen acquis, Denmark shall, in accordance with Article 4 of that Protocol, decide within a period of six months after the Council has decided on this Regulation whether it will implement this Regulation in its national law.
(49)
This Regulation constitutes a development of the provisions of the Schengen acquis in which the United Kingdom does not take part, in accordance with Council Decision 2000/365/EC (20); the United Kingdom is therefore not taking part in its adoption and is not bound by it or subject to its application.
(50)
This Regulation constitutes a development of the provisions of the Schengen acquis in which Ireland does not take part, in accordance with Council Decision 2002/192/EC (21). Ireland is therefore not taking part in its adoption and is not bound by it or subject to its application.
(51)
It is appropriate to align the period of application of this Regulation with that of Council Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 1311/2013 (22). Therefore, this Regulation should apply as from 1 January 2014,
HAVE ADOPTED THIS REGULATION:
