Article 10
Operating support under the national programmes of the Member States
1.   A Member State may use up to 40 % of the amount allocated under the Instrument to its national programme to finance operating support to the public authorities responsible for accomplishing the tasks and services which constitute a public service for the Union.
2.   Operating support shall be provided when the following conditions are met by the Member State concerned:
(a)
compliance with the Union acquis on borders and visas;
(b)
compliance with the objectives of the national programme;
(c)
compliance with common Union standards in order to enhance coordination between Member States and avoid duplication, fragmentation and cost inefficiency in the border control domain.
3.   To that end, before the approval of the national programme, the Commission shall assess the baseline situation in Member States which have indicated their intention to request operating support, taking into account, where relevant, the Schengen evaluation reports.
The findings of the Commission shall be the subject of an exchange of views with the Member State concerned.
Following the exchange of views, the acceptance by the Commission of budget support within the national programme of a Member State may be made conditional upon the programming and completion of a number of actions aiming to ensure that the conditions laid down in paragraph 2 are fully met by the time the budget support is provided.
4.   Operating support shall be concentrated on specific tasks and/or services and shall be focused on the objectives as laid down in Annex III. It shall entail full reimbursement of the expenditure incurred to accomplish the tasks and/or services defined in the national programme, within the financial limits set by the programme and the ceiling laid down in paragraph 1.
5.   Operating support shall be the subject of monitoring and exchange of information between the Commission and the Member State concerned in relation to the baseline situation in that Member State, the objectives and targets to be accomplished and the indicators to measure progress.
6.   The Commission shall set out, by means of implementing acts, reporting procedures on the application of this provision and any other practical arrangements to be made between Member States and the Commission to comply with this Article. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 18(2).
