Article 11
Operating support for the Special Transit Scheme
1.   The Instrument shall provide support to compensate for foregone fees from visas issued for the purpose of transit and additional costs incurred in implementing the Facilitated Transit Document (FTD) and the Facilitated Rail Transit Document (FRTD) scheme in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 693/2003 and Regulation (EC) No 694/2003.
2.   The resources allocated to Lithuania pursuant to paragraph 1 shall not exceed EUR 154 million for the period 2014-2020 and shall be made available as additional specific operating support for Lithuania.
3.   For the purpose of paragraph 1, additional costs means costs which result directly from the specific requirements of implementing the operation of the Special Transit Scheme and which are not generated as a result of the issuing of visas for the purpose of transit or other purposes.
The following types of additional cost shall be eligible for financing:
(a)
investment in infrastructures;
(b)
training of staff implementing the special transit scheme;
(c)
additional operational costs, including salaries of staff specifically implementing the special transit scheme.
4.   The foregone fees referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article shall be calculated on the basis of the level of visa fees and the visa fee waivers established by the Agreement between the European Community and the Russian Federation on the facilitation of the issuance of visas to the citizens of the European Union and the Russian Federation (30), within the financial framework set out in paragraph 2 of this Article.
5.   The Commission and Lithuania shall review the application of this Article in the event of changes which have an impact on the existence and/or functioning of the Special Transit Scheme.
6.   The Commission shall set out, by means of implementing acts, reporting procedures on the application of this provision and any financial and other practical arrangements to be made between Lithuania and the Commission to comply with this Article. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 18(2).
7.   To ensure the smooth functioning of the Special Transit Scheme the Commission may make specific interim payment arrangements which derogate from the provisions of Regulation (EU) No 514/2014.
