Article 3
Responsibility for the security of gas supply
1.   The security of gas supply shall be the shared responsibility of natural gas undertakings, Member States, in particular through their competent authorities, and the Commission, within their respective areas of activity and competence.
2.   Each Member State shall designate a competent authority. The competent authorities shall cooperate with each other in the implementation of this Regulation. Member States may allow the competent authority to delegate specific tasks set out in this Regulation to other bodies. Where competent authorities delegate the task of declaring any of the crisis levels referred to in Article 11(1), they shall do so only to a public authority, a transmission system operator or a distribution system operator. Delegated tasks shall be performed under the supervision of the competent authority and shall be specified in the preventive action plan and in the emergency plan.
3.   Each Member State shall, without delay, notify the Commission, and make public, the name of its competent authority and any changes thereto.
4.   When implementing the measures provided for in this Regulation, the competent authority shall establish the roles and responsibilities of the different actors concerned in such a way as to ensure a three-level approach which involves, first, the relevant natural gas undertakings, electricity undertakings where appropriate, and industry, second, Member States at national or regional level, and third, the Union.
5.   The Commission shall coordinate the action of the competent authorities at regional and Union levels, pursuant to this Regulation, inter alia, through the GCG or, in particular, in the event of a regional or Union emergency pursuant to Article 12(1), through the crisis management group referred to in Article 12(4).
6.   In the event of a regional or Union emergency, the transmission system operators shall cooperate and exchange information using the ReCo System for Gas established by ENTSOG. ENTSOG shall inform the Commission and the competent authorities of the Member States concerned accordingly.
7.   In accordance with Article 7(2), major transnational risks to the security of gas supply in the Union are to be identified and risk groups are to be established on that basis. Those risk groups shall serve as the basis for enhanced regional cooperation to increase the security of gas supply and shall enable agreement on appropriate and effective cross-border measures of all Member States concerned within the risk groups or outside the risk groups along the emergency supply corridors.
The list of such risk groups and their composition are set out in Annex I. The composition of the risk groups shall not prevent any other form of regional cooperation benefiting security of supply.
8.   The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 19 in order to update the composition of the risk groups set out in Annex I by amending that Annex in order to reflect the evolution of the major transnational risks to the security of gas supply in the Union and its impact on Member States, taking into account the result of Union-wide simulation of gas supply and infrastructure disruption scenarios carried out by ENTSOG in accordance with Article 7(1). Before proceeding to the update, the Commission shall consult the GCG in the setting provided for in Article 4(4) on the draft update.
