Article 4
Gas Coordination Group
1.   A Gas Coordination Group (GCG) shall be established to facilitate the coordination of measures concerning the security of gas supply. The GCG shall be composed of representatives of the Member States, in particular representatives of their competent authorities, as well as the Agency for the Cooperation of Energy Regulators (the ‘Agency’), ENTSOG and representative bodies of the industry concerned and those of relevant customers. The Commission shall, in consultation with the Member States, decide on the composition of the GCG, ensuring it is fully representative. The Commission shall chair the GCG. The GCG shall adopt its rules of procedure.
2.   The GCG shall be consulted and shall assist the Commission in particular on the following issues:
(a)
the security of gas supply, at any time and more specifically in the event of an emergency;
(b)
all information relevant to the security of gas supply at national, regional and Union level;
(c)
best practices and possible guidelines to all the parties concerned;
(d)
the level of the security of gas supply, benchmarks and assessment methodologies;
(e)
national, regional and Union scenarios and testing the levels of preparedness;
(f)
the assessment of the preventive action plans and the emergency plans, the coherence across the various plans, and the implementation of the measures provided for therein;
(g)
the coordination of measures to deal with an Union emergency, with the Energy Community Contracting Parties and with other third countries;
(h)
assistance needed by the most affected Member States.
3.   The Commission shall convene the GCG on a regular basis and shall share the information received from the competent authorities whilst preserving the confidentiality of commercially sensitive information.
4.   The Commission may convene the GCG in a setting which is restricted to the representatives of the Member States and in particular of their competent authorities. The Commission shall convene the GCG in this restricted setting if so requested by one or more of the representatives of the Member States and in particular of their competent authorities. In this case, Article 16(2) shall not apply.
