Article 8
Establishment of preventive action plans and emergency plans
1.   The measures to ensure the security of gas supply contained in a preventive action plan and an emergency plan shall be clearly defined, transparent, proportionate, non-discriminatory and verifiable, shall not unduly distort competition or the effective functioning of the internal market in gas and shall not endanger the security of gas supply of other Member States or of the Union.
2.   The competent authority of each Member State shall, after consulting the natural gas undertakings, the relevant organisations representing the interests of household and industrial gas customers, including electricity producers, electricity transmission system operators, and, where it is not the competent authority, the national regulatory authority, establish:
(a)
a preventive action plan containing the measures needed to remove or mitigate the risks identified, including the effects of energy efficiency and demand-side measures in the common and nationals risk assessments and in accordance with Article 9;
(b)
an emergency plan containing the measures to be taken to remove or mitigate the impact of a disruption of gas supply in accordance with Article 10.
3.   The preventive action plan and the emergency plan shall contain a regional chapter, or several regional chapters, where a Member State is a member of different risk groups as defined in Annex I.
The regional chapters shall be developed jointly by all Member States in the risk group before incorporation in the respective national plans. The Commission shall act as a facilitator so as to enable that the regional chapters collectively enhance the security of gas supply in the Union, and, do not give rise to any contradiction, and to overcome any obstacles to cooperation.
The regional chapters shall contain appropriate and effective cross-border measures, including in relation to LNG, subject to agreement between the Member States implementing the measures from the same or different risk groups affected by the measure on the basis of the simulation referred to in Article 7(1) and the common risk assessment.
4.   The competent authorities shall report regularly to the GCG on the progress achieved on the preparation and adoption of the preventive action plans and the emergency plans, in particular the regional chapters. In particular, competent authorities shall agree on a cooperation mechanism for the preparation of the preventive action plan and the emergency plan, including the exchange of draft plans. They shall report to the GCG on such agreed cooperation mechanism 16 months before the deadline for agreement of those plans and the updates of those plans.
The Commission may have a facilitating role in the preparation of the preventive action plan and the emergency plan, in particular for the establishment of the cooperation mechanism. If competent authorities within a risk group do not agree on a cooperation mechanism, the Commission shall propose a cooperation mechanism for that risk group. The competent authorities concerned shall agree on the cooperation mechanism for that risk group taking account of the Commission's proposal. The competent authorities shall ensure the regular monitoring of the implementation of the preventive action plan and the emergency plan.
5.   The preventive action plan and the emergency plan shall be developed in accordance with the templates contained in Annexes VI and VII. The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 19 in order to amend the templates set out in Annexes VI and VII, after consulting the GCG, in order to reflect the experience gained in the application of this Regulation, and to reduce the administrative burden on Member States.
6.   The competent authorities of neighbouring Member States shall in due time consult each other with a view to ensuring consistency between their preventive action plans and their emergency plans.
The competent authorities shall, within each risk group, exchange draft preventive action plans and emergency plans with proposals for cooperation, at the latest five months before the deadline for submission of the plans.
The final versions of the regional chapters referred to in paragraph 3 shall be agreed by all Member States in the risk group. The preventive action plans and emergency plans shall also contain the national measures necessary to implement and enforce the cross-border measures in the regional chapters.
7.   The preventive action plans and the emergency plans shall be made public and notified to the Commission by 1 March 2019. The Commission shall inform the GCG about the notification of the plans and publish them on the Commission's website.
Within four months of the notification by the competent authorities, the Commission shall assess the plans taking into account the views expressed in the GCG.
8.   The Commission shall issue an opinion to the competent authority with the recommendation to review a preventive action plan or an emergency plan if one or more of the following applies:
(a)
it is not effective to mitigate the risks as identified in the risk assessment;
(b)
it is inconsistent with the risk scenarios assessed or with the plans of another Member State or a risk group;
(c)
it does not comply with the requirement laid down in paragraph 1 not unduly to distort competition or the effective functioning of the internal market;
(d)
it does not comply with the provisions of this Regulation or other provisions of Union law.
9.   Within three months of notification of the Commission's opinion referred to in paragraph 8, the competent authority concerned shall notify the amended preventive action plan or the emergency plan to the Commission, or shall inform the Commission of the reasons for which it disagree with the recommendations.
In the event of disagreement related to elements referred to in paragraph 8, the Commission may, within four months of the reply of the competent authority, withdraw its request or convene the competent authority and, where the Commission considers it to be necessary, the GCG, in order to consider the issue. The Commission shall set out its detailed reasons for requesting any amendments to the preventive action plan or the emergency plan. The competent authority concerned shall take full account of the detailed reasons of the Commission.
Where applicable, the competent authority concerned shall without delay amend and make the amended preventive action plan or emergency plan public.
Where the final position of the competent authority concerned diverges from the Commission's detailed reasons, that competent authority shall provide and make public, together with its position and the Commission's detailed reasons, the justification underlying its position within two months of receipt of the detailed reasons of the Commission.
10.   For non-market-based measures adopted on or after 1 November 2017, the procedure set out in Article 9(4), (6), (8) and (9) shall apply.
11.   The confidentiality of commercially sensitive information shall be preserved.
12.   Preventive action plans and emergency plans developed under Regulation (EU) No 994/2010, updated in accordance with that Regulation, shall remain in force until the preventive action plans and the emergency plans referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article are established for the first time.
