Article 12
Regional and Union emergency responses
1.   The Commission may declare a regional or Union emergency at the request of a competent authority that has declared an emergency and following the verification in accordance with Article 11(8).
The Commission shall declare, as appropriate, a regional or Union emergency at the request of at least two competent authorities that have declared an emergency and following the verification in accordance with Article 11(8), and where the reasons for such emergencies are linked.
In all cases, when it declares a regional or Union emergency, the Commission, using the means of communication most appropriate to the situation, shall gather the views of, and take due account of all the relevant information provided by other competent authorities. When the Commission decides, following an assessment, that the underlying basis for the regional or Union emergency no longer justifies the declaration of an emergency, it shall declare an end to the regional or Union emergency and shall give its reasons and inform the Council of its decision.
2.   The Commission shall convene the GCG as soon as it declares a regional or Union emergency.
3.   In a regional or Union emergency, the Commission shall coordinate the action of the competent authorities, taking full account of relevant information from, and the results of, the consultation of the GCG. In particular, the Commission shall:
(a)
ensure the exchange of information;
(b)
ensure the consistency and effectiveness of action at Member State and regional levels in relation to the Union level;
(c)
coordinate the actions with regard to third countries.
4.   The Commission may convene a crisis management group composed of the crisis managers referred to in point (g) of Article 10(1), of the Member States concerned by the emergency. The Commission, in agreement with the crisis managers, may invite other relevant stakeholders to participate. The Commission shall ensure that the GCG is informed regularly about the work undertaken by the crisis management group.
5.   The Member States and in particular the competent authorities shall ensure that:
(a)
no measures are introduced which unduly restrict the flow of gas within the internal market at any time, in particular the flow of gas to the affected markets;
(b)
no measures are introduced that are likely seriously to endanger the gas supply situation in another Member State; and
(c)
cross-border access to infrastructure in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 715/2009 is maintained as far as technically and safely possible, in accordance with the emergency plan.
6.   Where, at the request of a competent authority or a natural gas undertaking or on its own initiative, the Commission considers that, in a regional or Union emergency, action taken by a Member State or a competent authority or the behaviour of a natural gas undertaking is contrary to paragraph 5, the Commission shall request that Member State or competent authority to modify its action or to take action in order to ensure compliance with paragraph 5, informing it of the reasons therefor. Due account shall be taken of the need to operate the gas system safely at all times.
Within three days of notification of the Commission request, the Member State or the competent authority shall modify its action and notify the Commission thereof, or shall inform the Commission of the reasons for which it disagrees with the request. In the latter case, the Commission may, within three days of being informed, amend or withdraw its request or convene the Member State or the competent authority and, where the Commission considers it to be necessary, the GCG in order to consider the issue. The Commission shall set out its detailed reasons for requesting any modification to the action. The Member State or the competent authority shall take full account of the position of the Commission. Where the final decision of the competent authority or the Member State diverges from the Commission position, the competent authority or the Member State shall provide the reasons underlying such decision.
7.   The Commission, after consulting the GCG, shall establish a permanent reserve list for a monitoring task force consisting of industry experts and representatives of the Commission. The monitoring task force may be deployed outside the Union when necessary and shall monitor and report on the gas flows into the Union, in cooperation with the supplying and transiting third countries.
8.   The competent authority shall provide to the Commission's ERCC the information on any need for assistance. ERCC shall assess the overall situation and advise on the assistance that should be provided to the most affected Member States, and where appropriate to third countries.
