Article 56
Classification of e-money tokens as significant e-money tokens
1.   EBA shall classify e-money tokens as significant e-money tokens where at least three of the criteria set out in Article 43(1) are met:
(a)
during the period covered by the first report of information as referred to in paragraph 3 of this Article, following the offer to the public or the seeking admission to trading of those tokens; or
(b)
during the period covered by at least two consecutive reports of information as referred to in paragraph 3 of this Article.
2.   Where several issuers issue the same e-money token, the fulfilment of the criteria set out in Article 43(1) shall be assessed after aggregating the data from those issuers.
3.   Competent authorities of the issuer’s home Member State shall report to EBA and the ECB information relevant for the assessment of the fulfilment of the criteria set out in Article 43(1), including, if applicable, the information received under Article 22, at least twice a year.
Where the issuer is established in a Member State whose official currency is not the euro, or where an official currency of a Member State that is not the euro is referenced by the e-money token, competent authorities shall transmit the information referred to in the first subparagraph also to the central bank of that Member State.
4.   Where EBA concludes that an e-money token fulfils the criteria set out in Article 43(1) in accordance with paragraph 1 of this Article, EBA shall prepare a draft decision to classify the e-money token as a significant e-money token and notify that draft decision to the issuer of the e-money token, the competent authority of the issuer’s home Member State, to the ECB and, in the cases referred to in paragraph 3, second subparagraph, of this Article, to the central bank of the Member State concerned.
Issuers of such e-money tokens, their competent authorities, the ECB and, where applicable, the central bank of the Member State concerned shall have 20 working days from the date of notification of that draft decision to provide observations and comments in writing. EBA shall duly consider those observations and comments before adopting a final decision.
5.   EBA shall take its final decision on whether to classify an e-money token as a significant e-money token within 60 working days from the date of notification referred to in paragraph 4 and immediately notify that decision to the issuer of such e-money token and its competent authority.
6.   Where an e-money token has been classified as significant pursuant to a decision of EBA taken in accordance with paragraph 5, the supervisory responsibilities with respect to the issuer of that e e-money token shall be transferred from the competent authority of the issuer’s home Member State to EBA in accordance with Article 117(4) within 20 working days from the date of notification of that decision.
EBA and the competent authority shall cooperate in order to ensure the smooth transition of supervisory competences.
7.   By way of derogation from paragraph 6, the supervisory responsibilities with respect to the issuers of significant e-money tokens denominated in an official currency of a Member State other than the euro, where at least 80 % of the number of holders and of the volume of transactions of those significant e-money tokens are concentrated in the home Member State, shall not be transferred to EBA.
The competent authority of the issuer’s home Member State shall provide EBA annually with information on any cases where the derogation referred to in the first subparagraph is applied.
For the purposes of the first subparagraph, a transaction shall be considered to take place in the home Member State when the payer or the payee is established in that Member State.
8.   EBA shall annually reassess the classification of significant e-money tokens on the basis of the available information, including from the reports referred to in paragraph 3 of this Article or the information received under Article 22.
Where EBA concludes that certain e-money tokens no longer meet the criteria set out in Article 43(1), in accordance with paragraph 1 of this Article, EBA shall prepare a draft decision to no longer classify the e-money token as significant and notify that draft decision to the issuers of those e-money tokens, to the competent authorities of their home Member State, to the ECB and, in the cases referred to in paragraph 3, second subparagraph, of this Article, to the central bank of the Member State concerned.
Issuers of such e-money tokens, their competent authorities, the ECB and the central bank of the Member State concerned shall have 20 working days from the date of notification of that draft decision to provide observations and comments in writing. EBA shall duly consider those observations and comments before adopting a final decision.
9.   EBA shall take its final decision on whether to no longer classify an e-money token as significant within 60 working days from the date of the notification referred to in paragraph 8 and immediately notify that decision to the issuer of that e-money token and its competent authority.
10.   Where an e-money token is no longer classified as significant pursuant to a decision of EBA taken in accordance with paragraph 9, the supervisory responsibilities with respect to the issuer of that e-money token shall be transferred from EBA to the competent authority of the issuer’s home Member State within 20 working days from the date of notification of that decision.
EBA and the competent authority shall cooperate in order to ensure the smooth transition of supervisory competences.
