Article 84
Content of the assessment of proposed acquisitions of crypto-asset service providers
1.   When performing the assessment referred to in Article 83(4), the competent authority shall appraise the suitability of the proposed acquirer and the financial soundness of the proposed acquisition referred to in Article 83(1) against all of the following criteria:
(a)
the reputation of the proposed acquirer;
(b)
the reputation, knowledge, skills and experience of any person who will direct the business of the crypto-asset service provider as a result of the proposed acquisition;
(c)
the financial soundness of the proposed acquirer, in particular in relation to the type of business envisaged and pursued in respect of the crypto-asset service provider in which the acquisition is proposed;
(d)
whether the crypto-asset service provider will be able to comply and continue to comply with the provisions of this Title;
(e)
whether there are reasonable grounds to suspect that, in connection with the proposed acquisition, money laundering or terrorist financing within the meaning of, respectively, Article 1(3) and (5) of Directive (EU) 2015/849 is being or has been committed or attempted, or that the proposed acquisition could increase the risk thereof.
2.   The competent authority may oppose the proposed acquisition only where there are reasonable grounds for doing so on the basis of the criteria set out in paragraph 1 of this Article or where the information provided in accordance with Article 83(4) is incomplete or false.
3.   Member States shall not impose any prior conditions in respect of the level of qualifying holding that is required to be acquired under this Regulation nor allow their competent authorities to examine the proposed acquisition in terms of the economic needs of the market.
4.   ESMA, in close cooperation with EBA, shall develop draft regulatory technical standards specifying the detailed content of the information that is necessary to carry out the assessment referred to in Article 83(4), first subparagraph. The information required shall be relevant for a prudential assessment, proportionate and adapted to the nature of the proposed acquirer and the proposed acquisition referred to in Article 83(1).
ESMA shall submit the draft regulatory technical standards referred to in the first subparagraph to the Commission by 30 June 2024.
Power is delegated to the Commission to supplement this Regulation by adopting the regulatory technical standards referred to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph in accordance with Articles 10 to 14 of Regulation (EU) No 1095/2010.
