Article 12
Notification and approval of breeding programmes carried out in Member States other than the Member State in which the breed society or breeding operation is recognised
1.   Where a breed society or a breeding operation intends to carry out a breeding programme approved in accordance with Article 8(3) also on breeding animals kept in a Member State other than the Member State where that breed society or breeding operation is recognised in accordance with Article 4(3) (for the purpose of this Article, ‘that other Member State’), that breed society or breeding operation shall notify the intended extension of its geographical territory to the competent authority which has recognised that breed society or breeding operation in accordance with Article 4(3).
2.   The competent authority which has recognised that breed society or breeding operation in accordance with Article 4(3) shall:
(a)
notify the competent authority of that other Member State at least 90 days before the intended commencement date of the breeding programme in that other Member State, and, at the request of the notified authority, provide a translation of that notification in one of the official languages of that other Member State;
(b)
at the request of the notified authority, provide, at least 60 days before the intended commencement date of the breeding programme in that other Member State, a copy of the breeding programme as approved in accordance with Article 8(3) accompanied, if requested by that authority, by a translation into one of the official languages of that other Member State which shall be provided by the applying breed society or breeding operation.
3.   The competent authority of that other Member State may, within 90 days from the date of receipt of the notification referred to in point (a) of paragraph 2, refuse to approve the carrying out on its territory of the breeding programme, where:
(a)
an approved breeding programme is already being carried out in that other Member State on purebred breeding animals of the same breed; and
(b)
the approval of a further breeding programme would compromise the breeding programme carried out by another breed society for the same breed which has already been approved in that other Member State as regards at least one of the following:
(i)
the essential traits of the breed characteristics or the main objectives of that breeding programme;
(ii)
the preservation of that breed or of the genetic diversity within that breed;
(iii)
where the aim of that breeding programme is the preservation of that breed, the effective implementation of that breeding programme:
—
in the case of an endangered breed, or
—
in the case of an autochthonous breed which is not commonly found in one or more of the territories of the Union.
4.   The competent authority of that other Member State shall inform the competent authority which has recognised the breed society or breeding operation in accordance with Article 4(3) about the result of the notification provided for in paragraph 1 of this Article and, where it refuses the approval for the carrying out on its territory of the breeding programme, shall provide a reasoned explanation for its refusal.
5.   Failure by the competent authority of that other Member State to reply to the notification referred to in point (a) of paragraph 2 within 90 days from the date of receipt of that notification shall constitute approval.
6.   The competent authority which has recognised the breed society or breeding operation in accordance with Article 4(3) shall inform the breed society or breeding operation of the result of the notification provided for in point (a) of paragraph 2 of this Article without undue delay and, in the case of refusal, shall provide that breed society or breeding operation with the reasoned explanation for that refusal referred to in paragraph 4 of this Article.
7.   Where the competent authority of that other Member State refuses the approval in accordance with paragraph 3, it shall inform the Commission of its refusal together with a statement of reasons for that refusal.
8.   Where the competent authority of that other Member State refuses the approval in accordance with paragraph 3 of this Article and the breed society or breeding operation which intends to carry out that breeding programme in that other Member State requests reconsideration of that refusal, the competent authority of that other Member State and the competent authority which has recognised the breed society or breeding operation in accordance with Article 4(3) shall cooperate with each other with regard to that request for reconsideration.
9.   The competent authority which has recognised the breed society or breeding operation in accordance with Article 4(3) shall inform the competent authority of that other Member State of the changes in breeding programmes approved in accordance with Article 9(3).
10.   At the request of the competent authority of that other Member State, the breed society or breeding operation operating in accordance with this Article on the territory of that other Member State shall provide up-to-date information to that competent authority in particular with regard to the number of breeders and breeding animals on which the breeding programme is carried out on that territory. Any such request shall be made in the same manner as requests to the breed societies or breeding operations recognised in that other Member State.
11.   The competent authority of that other Member State may withdraw the approval of the breeding programme provided for in this Article, where, for at least 12 months, no breeder on the territory of that other Member State participates in that breeding programme.
