Article 35
Equivalence of measures applied to animal breeding in third countries
1.   The Commission may adopt implementing acts, recognising that measures applied in a third country are equivalent to those required by this Regulation in relation to the following:
(a)
the recognition of breed societies and breeding operations provided for in Article 4;
(b)
the approval of breeding programmes of breed societies and breeding operations provided for in Article 8;
(c)
the entry of purebred breeding animals in breeding books and the registration of hybrid breeding pigs in breeding registers provided for in Articles 18, 20 and 23;
(d)
the acceptance of breeding animals for breeding provided for in Articles 21, 22 and 24;
(e)
the use of germinal products of breeding animals for testing and breeding provided for in Articles 21 and 24;
(f)
the performance testing and genetic evaluation provided for in Article 25;
(g)
the official controls on operators provided for in Article 43.
Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 62(2).
2.   The implementing acts referred to in paragraph 1 shall be adopted on the basis of:
(a)
a thorough examination of the information and data provided by the third country which is seeking to have its measures recognised as equivalent to those required by this Regulation;
(b)
where appropriate, the satisfactory outcome of a control performed by the Commission in accordance with Article 57.
3.   The implementing acts referred to in paragraph 1 may set out the detailed arrangements governing the entry of breeding animals and the germinal products thereof into the Union from the third country concerned and may include:
(a)
the format and content of the zootechnical certificates accompanying those breeding animals or the germinal products thereof;
(b)
specific requirements applicable to the entry into the Union of those breeding animals or the germinal products thereof and the official controls to be performed on those breeding animals or on the germinal products thereof upon entry into the Union;
(c)
where necessary, procedures for drawing up and amending lists of breeding bodies, located in the third country concerned, from which the entry into the Union of breeding animals and the germinal products thereof is permitted.
4.   The Commission shall, without undue delay, adopt implementing acts repealing the implementing acts referred to in paragraph 1 where any of the conditions for the recognition of equivalence of measures established at the time of their adoption are no longer fulfilled. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 62(2).
