Article 27
Carrying out of performance testing and genetic evaluation
1.   Where performance testing or genetic evaluation is to be carried out according to the breeding programme approved in accordance with Article 8(3), and, where applicable, Article 12, breed societies and breeding operations shall:
(a)
carry out that performance testing or genetic evaluation themselves; or
(b)
designate the third parties to which that performance testing or genetic evaluation is to be outsourced.
2.   A Member State, or, if that Member State so decides, its competent authorities, may require that, in order for the third parties to be designated in accordance with point (b) of paragraph 1, those third parties must have been authorised to carry out performance testing or genetic evaluation of breeding animals by that Member State, or its competent authorities, except where the designated third party in question is a public body subject to control by that Member State, or its competent authorities.
3.   A Member State, or, if that Member State so decides, its competent authorities, making use of the provision referred to in paragraph 2 shall ensure that an authorisation is granted to the third parties referred to in that paragraph, if they have:
(a)
the facilities and equipment necessary to carry out that performance testing or genetic evaluation;
(b)
suitably qualified staff; and
(c)
the capability to carry out that performance testing or genetic evaluation in accordance with Article 25.
4.   By way of derogation from Article 8(4)(a), a Member State or its competent authority may decide that a third party which is authorised in accordance with paragraph 2 of this Article, or the designated public body subject to control by the Member State or its competent authorities referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article, shall be responsible to that competent authority for ensuring compliance with the requirements provided for in this Regulation applicable to that outsourced performance testing or genetic evaluation.
5.   Breed societies or breeding operations themselves carrying out performance testing or genetic evaluation or third parties designated by a breed society or breeding operation in accordance with point (b) of paragraph 1 of this Article or authorised by a Member State or its competent authorities as referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article may commit themselves to comply with the rules and standards established by ICAR or may participate in activities carried out by the European Union reference centres referred to in Article 29.
The results of such commitments or the participation in such activities may be taken into account by the competent authorities when recognising those breed societies or breeding operations, approving their breeding programmes, authorising those third parties or carrying out official controls on those operators.
6.   Breed societies and breeding operations shall make publicly available the detailed information on those who carry out the performance testing or genetic evaluation.
