Article 1
Subject matter and scope
1.   This Regulation lays down:
(a)
zootechnical and genealogical rules for trade in breeding animals and their germinal products, and for their entry into the Union;
(b)
rules for the recognition of breed societies and breeding operations and for the approval of their breeding programmes;
(c)
the rights and obligations of breeders, breed societies and breeding operations;
(d)
rules for the entry of breeding animals in breeding books and breeding registers and for the acceptance for breeding of breeding animals and their germinal products;
(e)
rules for the performance testing and genetic evaluation of breeding animals;
(f)
rules for the issuing of zootechnical certificates for breeding animals and their germinal products;
(g)
rules for the performance of official controls, and in particular those on breed societies and breeding operations, and rules for the performance of other official activities;
(h)
rules for administrative assistance and cooperation and rules for enforcement by Member States;
(i)
rules for the performance of controls by the Commission in Member States and third countries.
2.   This Regulation applies to breeding animals and their germinal products where those animals or the offspring resulting from those germinal products are intended to be entered as purebred breeding animals in a breeding book or registered as hybrid breeding pigs in a breeding register.
3.   This Regulation does not apply to breeding animals and their germinal products where those animals and germinal products are intended for technical or scientific experiments carried out under the supervision of the competent authorities.
4.   Article 9(4), Article 13, Article 14(3) and (4), Articles 23 and 24, Article 28(2) and Article 36(1) do not apply to private undertakings, recognised as breeding operations, which operate in closed production systems.
5.   This Regulation is without prejudice to Member States' rights to take national measures to regulate the carrying out of breeding programmes that have not been approved in accordance with Article 8(3), and, where applicable, Article 12.
