Article 7
Lists of recognised breed societies and breeding operations
1.   Member States shall draw up and keep up to date a list of breed societies and breeding operations that their competent authorities have recognised in accordance with Article 4(3) and which have at least one breeding programme that has been approved in accordance with Article 8(3). Member States shall make that list available to the public.
2.   The list provided for in paragraph 1 shall include the following information:
(a)
the name, contact details and, where available, the website of the breed society or breeding operation;
(b)
for each breed society or breeding operation on that list:
(i)
in the case of purebred breeding animals, the name of the breed, or, in the case of hybrid breeding pigs, the name of the breed, line or cross, covered by each of its breeding programmes approved in accordance with Article 8(3), and, where the breed society makes use of the derogations referred to in Article 19 or point 2 of Chapter III of Part 1 of Annex II, a reference to those derogations;
(ii)
the geographical territory where each of its breeding programmes is to be carried out;
(iii)
in the case of purebred breeding animals of the equine species, where applicable, the name and contact details of the breed society which maintains the breeding book of the origin of the breed;
(iv)
for each of its breeding programmes, where available, a reference to a website where information on those breeding programmes can be accessed.
3.   Member States shall also include in the list provided for in paragraph 2 of this Article any competent authority which carries out a breeding programme in accordance with Article 38.
4.   Where the recognition of a breed society or a breeding operation is withdrawn in accordance with point (e) of third subparagraph of Article 47(1) or the approval of a breeding programme is suspended or withdrawn in accordance with point (d) of third subparagraph of Article 47(1), Member States shall, without undue delay, indicate that suspension or withdrawal in the list provided for in paragraph 1 of this Article.
Where, for a period of 24 months, that recognition remains withdrawn or that approval remains suspended or withdrawn, Member States shall definitively remove that breed society, breeding operation or breeding programme from the list provided for in paragraph 1.
5.   The Commission shall adopt implementing acts, laying down model forms for the presentation of the information to be included in the list of recognised breed societies and breeding operations provided for in paragraph 1. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 62(2).
