Article 60
Establishment of special measures regarding the entry into the Union of breeding animals and their germinal products
1.   Where there is evidence that widespread serious non-compliance with the rules provided for in this Regulation is taking place in a third country, the Commission shall adopt implementing acts concerning one or more of the following:
(a)
prohibiting the entry into the Union, as breeding animals, or the germinal products thereof, of animals, or their semen, oocytes or embryos originating from that third country;
(b)
prohibiting the entry in breeding books maintained by breed societies or the registration in breeding registers maintained by breeding operations of breeding animals, and the offspring produced from the germinal products thereof, originating from that third country.
Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 62(2).
In addition to, or instead of those implementing acts, the Commission may do one or more of the following:
(a)
delete that third country or the breeding bodies of that third country from the list provided for in Article 34(1);
(b)
take any other appropriate measures.
2.   The implementing acts and other measures referred to in paragraph 1 shall identify breeding animals and their germinal products by their codes in the Combined Nomenclature.
3.   When adopting the implementing acts and other measures referred to in paragraph 1, the Commission shall take account of:
(a)
the information collected in accordance with Article 58(2);
(b)
any other information that the third country concerned by the non-compliance referred to in paragraph 1 has provided;
(c)
where necessary, the results of controls referred to in Article 57(1).
4.   The Commission shall monitor the non-compliance referred to in paragraph 1 and shall, in accordance with the same procedure as for their adoption, amend or repeal the measures adopted, depending on how the situation develops.

CHAPTER XII



Delegation and implementation


