Article 11
Funding rates
1.   The financial assistance of the Union provided under the Programme shall not exceed 20 % of the total eligible cost of an action as referred to in point (c) of Article 6(1). In all the other cases, the assistance may cover up to the total eligible cost of the action.
2.   An action as referred to in Article 6(1) that is developed in the context of Permanent Structured Cooperation may benefit from a funding rate increased by an additional 10 percentage points.
3.   An action as referred to in Article 6(1) may benefit from an increased funding rate, as referred to in the second and third subparagraphs of this paragraph, where at least 10 % of the total eligible cost of the action is allocated to SMEs established in the Union.
The funding rate may be increased by percentage points equivalent to the percentage of the total eligible cost of an action allocated to SMEs established in Member States in which the undertakings in the consortium that are not SMEs are established, up to an additional 5 percentage points.
The funding rate may be increased by percentage points equivalent to twice the percentage of the total eligible cost of an action allocated to SMEs established in Member States other than those referred to in the second subparagraph.
4.   An action as referred to in Article 6(1) may benefit from a funding rate increased by an additional 10 percentage points where at least 15 % of the total eligible cost of the action is allocated to mid-caps established in the Union.
5.   Indirect eligible costs shall be determined by applying a flat rate of 25 % of the total direct eligible costs, excluding direct eligible costs for subcontracting.
6.   The overall increase in the funding rate of an action following the application of paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 shall not exceed 35 percentage points.
7.   The financial assistance of the Union provided under the Programme, including increased funding rates, shall not cover more than 100 % of the eligible cost of the action.
