Article 6
Eligible actions
1.   The Programme shall provide support for actions by beneficiaries in the development phase covering both new defence products and technologies and the upgrade of existing products and technologies provided that the use of pre-existing information needed to carry out the action for the upgrade is not subject to a restriction by a third country or by a third-country entity, directly, or indirectly through one or more intermediary undertakings.
An eligible action shall relate to one or more of the following:
(a)
studies, such as feasibility studies, and other accompanying measures;
(b)
the design of a defence product, tangible or intangible component or technology as well as the technical specifications on which such design has been developed, including partial tests for risk reduction in an industrial or representative environment;
(c)
the system prototyping of a defence product, tangible or intangible component or technology;
(d)
the testing of a defence product, tangible or intangible component or technology;
(e)
the qualification of a defence product, tangible or intangible component or technology;
(f)
the certification of a defence product, tangible or intangible component or technology;
(g)
the development of technologies or assets increasing efficiency across the life cycle of defence products and technologies.
2.   Actions as referred to in paragraph 1 shall be carried out by undertakings cooperating within a consortium of at least three eligible entities which are established in at least three different Member States. At least three of those eligible entities established in at least two different Member States shall not be controlled, directly or indirectly, by the same entity or shall not control each other.
3.   The consortium as referred to in paragraph 2 shall offer proof of viability by demonstrating that the costs of the action that are not covered by Union support are to be covered by other means of financing, such as by Member States' contributions.
4.   With regard to actions referred to in points (c) to (g) of paragraph 1, the consortium shall provide proof of their contribution to the competitiveness of the European defence industry by demonstrating that at least two Member States intend to procure the final product or to use the technology in a coordinated way, including through joint procurement where applicable.
5.   Actions as referred to in point (b) of paragraph 1 shall be based on common requirements jointly agreed by at least two Member States. Actions as referred to in points (c) to (g) of paragraph 1 shall be based on common technical specifications jointly agreed by the Member States that are to co-finance or that intend to jointly procure the final product or to jointly use the technology, as referred to in paragraphs 3 and 4, thereby strengthening the standardisation and interoperability of systems.
6.   Actions for the development of products and technologies the use, development or production of which is prohibited by international law shall not be eligible for funding under the Programme.
