Article 21
Status of investigation
1.   Member States shall define, within the framework of their respective legal system, the legal status of the investigation that is to enable the investigators-in-charge to carry out their task in the most efficient way and within the shortest time.
2.   In accordance with their national legislation, Member States shall ensure full cooperation by the authorities responsible for any judicial inquiry, and shall ensure that the investigators are given access as soon as possible to information and evidence relevant for the investigation. In particular, they shall be granted:
(a)
immediate access to the site of the accident or incident as well as to the rolling stock involved, the related infrastructure and traffic control and signalling installations;
(b)
the right to an immediate listing of evidence and controlled removal of wreckage, infrastructure installations or components for examination or analysis purposes;
(c)
unrestricted access to, and use of, the contents of on-board recorders and equipment for the recording of verbal messages and registration of the operation of the signalling and traffic control system;
(d)
access to the results of examination of the bodies of victims;
(e)
access to the results of examinations of the train staff and other railway staff involved in the accident or incident;
(f)
the opportunity to question the railway staff involved in the accident or incident and other witnesses; and
(g)
access to any relevant information or records held by the infrastructure manager, railway undertakings, entities in charge of maintenance and national safety authority concerned.
3.   The Agency shall cooperate with the investigating body when the investigation involves vehicles authorised by the Agency or railway undertakings certified by the Agency. It shall as soon as possible submit all requested information or records to the investigating body and provide explanations, where requested.
4.   The investigation shall be carried out independently of any judicial inquiry.
