Article 14
Board of Regulators
1.   The Board of Regulators shall comprise:
(a)
senior representatives of the regulatory authorities, in accordance with Article 35(1) of Directive 2009/72/EC and Article 39(1) of Directive 2009/73/EC, and one alternate per Member State from the current senior staff of those authorities;
(b)
one non-voting representative of the Commission.
Only one representative per Member State from the national regulatory authority may be admitted to the Board of Regulators.
Each national regulatory authority shall be responsible for nominating the alternate from current staff of the national regulatory authority.
2.   The Board of Regulators shall elect a Chairman and a Vice-Chairman from among its members. The Vice-Chairman shall replace the Chairman if the latter is not in a position to perform his duties. The term of office of the Chairman and of the Vice-Chairman shall be two-and-a-half years and shall be renewable. In any event, however, the term of office of the Chairman and that of the Vice-Chairman shall expire when they cease to be members of the Board of Regulators.
3.   The Board of Regulators shall act by a two-thirds majority of its members present. Each member or alternate shall have one vote.
4.   The Board of Regulators shall adopt and publish its Rules of procedure, which shall set out in greater detail the arrangements governing voting, in particular the conditions on the basis of which one member may act on behalf of another and also, where appropriate, the rules governing quorums. The rules of procedure may provide for specific working methods for the consideration of issues arising in the context of regional cooperation initiatives.
5.   When carrying out the tasks conferred upon it by this Regulation and without prejudice to its members acting on behalf of their respective regulatory authority, the Board of Regulators shall act independently and shall not seek or follow instructions from any government of a Member State, from the Commission, or from another public or private entity.
6.   The secretarial services of the Board of Regulators shall be provided by the Agency.
