Article 16
Director
1.   The Agency shall be managed by its Director, who shall act in accordance with the guidance referred to in the second sentence of Article 15(1) and, where provided for in this Regulation, the opinions of the Board of Regulators. Without prejudice to the respective roles of the Administrative Board and the Board of Regulators in relation to the tasks of the Director, the Director shall neither seek nor follow any instruction from any government, from the Commission, or from any other public or private entity.
2.   The Director shall be appointed by the Administrative Board following a favourable opinion of the Board of Regulators, on the basis of merit as well as skills and experience relevant to the energy sector, from a list of at least three candidates proposed by the Commission, following a public call for expression of interest. Before appointment, the candidate selected by the Administrative Board may be invited to make a statement before the competent committee of the European Parliament and to answer questions put by its members.
3.   The Director’s term of office shall be five years. In the course of the nine months preceding the end of that period, the Commission shall undertake an assessment. In the assessment, the Commission shall examine in particular:
(a)
the performance of the Director;
(b)
the Agency’s duties and requirements in the coming years.
The assessment concerning point (b) shall be carried out with the assistance of an independent external expert.
4.   The Administrative Board, acting on a proposal from the Commission, after having consulted and given the utmost consideration to the assessment and the opinion of the Board of Regulators on that assessment and only in those cases where it can be justified by the duties and requirements of the Agency, may extend once the term of office of the Director by no more than three years.
5.   The Administrative Board shall inform the European Parliament of its intention to extend the Director’s term of office. Within one month before the extension of his term of office, the Director may be invited to make a statement before the competent committee of the Parliament and to answer questions put by the members of that committee.
6.   If his term of office is not extended, the Director shall remain in office until the appointment of his successor.
7.   The Director may be removed from office only upon a decision of the Administrative Board, after having obtained a favourable opinion of the Board of Regulators. The Administrative Board shall reach that decision on the basis of a three-quarters majority of its members.
8.   The European Parliament and the Council may call upon the Director to submit a report on the performance of his duties. The European Parliament may also invite the Director to make a statement before its competent committee and answer questions put by the members of that committee.
