Whereas:
(1)
The Communication of the Commission of 10 January 2007 entitled ‘An Energy Policy for Europe’ highlighted the importance of completing the internal markets in electricity and natural gas. Improving the regulatory framework at Community level was identified as a key measure to achieve that objective.
(2)
An independent advisory group on electricity and gas, called the European Regulators Group for Electricity and Gas (ERGEG) was established by Commission Decision 2003/796/EC (4) to facilitate consultation, coordination and cooperation between the regulatory bodies in Member States, and between those bodies and the Commission, with a view to consolidating the internal markets in electricity and natural gas. That group is composed of representatives of the national regulatory authorities established pursuant to Directive 2003/54/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2003 concerning common rules for the internal market in electricity (5) and Directive 2003/55/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2003 concerning common rules for the internal market in natural gas (6).
(3)
The work undertaken by the ERGEG since its establishment has made a positive contribution to the internal markets in electricity and natural gas. However, it is widely recognised by the sector, and has been proposed by the ERGEG itself, that voluntary cooperation between national regulatory authorities should now take place within a Community structure with clear competences and with the power to adopt individual regulatory decisions in a number of specific cases.
(4)
The European Council of 8 and 9 March 2007 invited the Commission to propose measures to set up an independent mechanism for national regulators to cooperate.
(5)
Тhe Member States should cooperate closely, eliminating obstacles to cross-border exchanges of electricity and natural gas with a view to achieving the objectives of Community energy policy. On the basis of the impact assessment of the resource requirements for a central entity, it was concluded that an independent central entity offered a number of long-term advantages over other options. An Agency for the Cooperation of Energy Regulators (the Agency) should be established in order to fill the regulatory gap at Community level and to contribute towards the effective functioning of the internal markets in electricity and natural gas. The Agency should also enable national regulatory authorities to enhance their cooperation at Community level and participate, on a mutual basis, in the exercise of Community-related functions.
(6)
The Agency should ensure that regulatory functions performed by the national regulatory authorities in accordance with Directive 2009/72/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 July 2009 concerning common rules for the internal market in electricity (7) and Directive 2009/73/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 July 2009 concerning common rules for the internal market in natural gas (8) are properly coordinated and, where necessary, completed at the Community level. To that end, it is necessary to guarantee the independence of the Agency from electricity and gas producers, transmission and distribution system operators, whether public or private, and consumers and to ensure the conformity of its actions with Community law, its technical and regulatory capacities and its transparency, amenability to democratic control and efficiency.
(7)
The Agency should monitor regional cooperation between transmission system operators in the electricity and gas sectors as well as the execution of the tasks of the European Network of Transmission System Operators for Electricity (ENTSO for Electricity), and the European Network of Transmission System Operators for Gas (ENTSO for Gas). The involvement of the Agency is essential in order to ensure that the cooperation between transmission system operators proceeds in an efficient and transparent way for the benefit of the internal markets in electricity and natural gas.
(8)
The Agency should monitor, in cooperation with the Commission, the Member States and relevant national authorities, the internal markets in electricity and natural gas and inform the European Parliament, the Commission and national authorities of its findings where appropriate. Those monitoring tasks of the Agency should not duplicate or hamper monitoring by the Commission or national authorities, in particular national competition authorities.
(9)
The Agency has an important role in developing framework guidelines which are non-binding by nature (framework guidelines) with which network codes must be in line. It is also considered appropriate for the Agency, and consistent with its purpose, to have a role in reviewing network codes (both when created and upon modification) to ensure that they are in line with the framework guidelines, before it may recommend them to the Commission for adoption.
(10)
It is appropriate to provide an integrated framework within which national regulatory authorities are able to participate and cooperate. That framework should facilitate the uniform application of the legislation on the internal markets in electricity and natural gas throughout the Community. As regards situations concerning more than one Member State, the Agency should be granted the power to adopt individual decisions. That power should under certain conditions cover technical issues, the regulatory regime for electricity and natural gas infrastructure that connects or that might connect at least two Member States and, as a last resort, exemptions from the internal market rules for new electricity interconnectors and new gas infrastructure located in more than one Member State.
(11)
Since the Agency has an overview of the national regulatory authorities, it should have an advisory role towards the Commission, other Community institutions and national regulatory authorities as regards the issues relating to the purpose for which it was established. It should also be required to inform the Commission where it finds that the cooperation between transmission system operators does not produce the results which are needed or that a national regulatory authority whose decision is not in compliance with the Guidelines does not implement the opinion, recommendation or decision of the Agency appropriately.
(12)
The Agency should also be able to make recommendations to assist regulatory authorities and market players in sharing good practices.
(13)
The Agency should consult interested parties, where appropriate, and provide them with a reasonable opportunity to comment on proposed measures, such as network codes and rules.
(14)
The Agency should contribute to the implementation of the guidelines on trans-European energy networks as laid down in Decision No 1364/2006/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 6 September 2006 laying down guidelines for trans-European energy networks (9), in particular when providing its opinion on the non-binding Community-wide ten-year network development plans (Community-wide network development plans) in accordance with Article 6(3) of this Regulation.
(15)
The Agency should contribute to the efforts of enhancing energy security.
(16)
The structure of the Agency should be adapted to meet the specific needs of energy regulation. In particular, the specific role of the national regulatory authorities needs to be taken fully into account and their independence guaranteed.
(17)
The Administrative Board should have the necessary powers to establish the budget, check its implementation, draw up internal rules, adopt financial regulations and appoint a Director. A rotation system should be used for the renewal of the members of the Administrative Board who are appointed by the Council so as to ensure a balanced participation of Member States over time. The Administrative Board should act independently and objectively in the public interest and should not seek or follow political instructions.
(18)
The Agency should have the necessary powers to perform its regulatory functions in an efficient, transparent, reasoned and, above all, independent manner. The independence of the Agency from electricity and gas producers and transmission and distribution system operators is not only a key principle of good governance but also a fundamental condition to ensure market confidence. Without prejudice to its members’ acting on behalf of their respective national authorities, the Board of Regulators should therefore act independently from any market interest, should avoid conflicts of interests and should not seek or follow instructions or accept recommendations from a government of a Member State, from the Commission or another public or private entity. The decisions of the Board of Regulators should, at the same time, comply with Community law concerning energy, such as the internal energy market, the environment and competition. The Board of Regulators should report its opinions, recommendations and decisions to the Community institutions.
(19)
Where the Agency has decision-making powers, interested parties should, for reasons of procedural economy, be granted a right of appeal to a Board of Appeal, which should be part of the Agency, but independent from its administrative and regulatory structure. In the interest of continuity, the appointment or renewal of the members of the Board of Appeal should allow for partial replacement of the members of the Board of Appeal. The decisions of the Board of Appeal may be subject to appeal before the Court of Justice of the European Communities.
(20)
The Agency should be mainly financed from the general budget of the European Union, by fees and by voluntary contributions. In particular, the resources currently pooled by regulatory authorities for their cooperation at Community level should continue to be available to the Agency. The Community budgetary procedure should remain applicable as far as any subsidies chargeable to the general budget of the European Union are concerned. Moreover, the auditing of accounts should be undertaken by the Court of Auditors in accordance with Article 91 of Commission Regulation (EC, Euratom) No 2343/2002 of 19 November 2002 on the framework Financial Regulation for the bodies referred to in Article 185 of Council Regulation (EC, Euratom) No 1605/2002 on the Financial Regulation applicable to the general budget of the European Communities (10).
(21)
After the establishment of the Agency, its budget should be assessed by the budgetary authority on an ongoing basis, with reference to the Agency’s workload and performance. The budgetary authority should ensure that the best standards of efficiency are met.
(22)
The Agency should have highly professional staff. In particular, it should benefit from the competence and experience of staff seconded by the national regulatory authorities, the Commission and the Member States. The Staff Regulations of Officials of the European Communities (the Staff Regulations) and the Conditions of employment of other servants of the European Communities (the Conditions of Employment), laid down in Regulation (EEC, Euratom, ECSC) No 259/68 (11) and the rules adopted jointly by the European Community institutions for the purpose of applying those regulations should apply to the staff of the Agency. The Administrative Board, in agreement with the Commission, should adopt appropriate implementing rules.
(23)
The Agency should apply the general rules regarding public access to documents held by Community bodies. The Administrative Board should establish the practical measures to protect commercially sensitive data and personal data.
(24)
The Agency should be accountable to the European Parliament, the Council and the Commission, where appropriate.
(25)
Countries which are not members of the Community should be able to participate in the work of the Agency in accordance with appropriate agreements to be concluded by the Community.
(26)
The measures necessary for the implementation of this Regulation should be adopted in accordance with Council Decision 1999/468/EC of 28 June 1999 laying down the procedures for the exercise of implementing powers conferred on the Commission (12).
(27)
In particular, the Commission should be empowered to adopt the Guidelines necessary in situations in which the Agency becomes competent to decide upon the terms and conditions for access to and operational security of cross-border infrastructure. Since those measures are of general scope and are designed to amend non-essential elements of this Regulation, by supplementing it with new non-essential elements, they must be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny provided for in Article 5a of Decision 1999/468/EC.
(28)
The Commission should submit to the European Parliament and to the Council by three years after the first director has taken up his duties, and every four years thereafter, a report on the Agency’s specific tasks and the results achieved, accompanied by any appropriate proposals. In that report, the Commission should make suggestions on additional tasks for the Agency.
(29)
Since the objectives of this Regulation, namely the participation and cooperation of national regulatory authorities at Community level, cannot be sufficiently achieved by the Member States and can therefore be better achieved at Community level, the Community may adopt measures, in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity as set out in Article 5 of the Treaty. In accordance with the principle of proportionality, as set out in that Article, this Regulation does not go beyond what is necessary in order to achieve those objectives,
HAVE ADOPTED THIS REGULATION:
