Article 13
Tasks of the Administrative Board
1.   The Administrative Board shall, after having consulted the Board of Regulators and obtained its favourable opinion in accordance with Article 15(2), appoint the Director in accordance with Article 16(2).
2.   The Administrative Board shall formally appoint the members of the Board of Regulators in accordance with Article 14(1).
3.   The Administrative Board shall formally appoint the members of the Board of Appeal in accordance with Article 18(1) and (2).
4.   The Administrative Board shall ensure that the Agency carries out its mission and performs the tasks assigned to it in accordance with this Regulation.
5.   The Administrative Board shall adopt, before 30 September each year, after consulting the Commission and after having received approval by the Board of Regulators in accordance with Article 15(3), the work programme of the Agency for the coming year and shall transmit it to the European Parliament, the Council and the Commission. The work programme shall be adopted without prejudice to the annual budgetary procedure and shall be made public.
6.   The Administrative Board shall adopt and, if necessary, revise a multi-annual programme. That revision shall be based on an evaluation report, made by an independent external expert at the request of the Administrative Board. Those documents shall be made public.
7.   The Administrative Board shall exercise its budgetary powers in accordance with Articles 21 to 24.
8.   The Administrative Board shall decide, after having obtained the agreement of the Commission, whether to accept any legacies, donations or grants from other Community sources or any voluntary contribution from the Member States or from the regulatory authorities. The opinion that the Administrative Board shall deliver pursuant to Article 24(5) shall explicitly address the sources of funding set out in this paragraph.
9.   The Administrative Board, in consultation with the Board of Regulators, shall exercise disciplinary authority over the Director.
10.   The Administrative Board shall, where necessary, draw up the Agency’s implementing rules for giving effect to the Staff Regulations pursuant to Article 28(2).
11.   The Administrative Board shall adopt practical measures regarding the right of access to the documents of the Agency, in accordance with Article 30.
12.   The Administrative Board shall adopt and publish the annual report on the activities of the Agency, on the basis of the draft annual report referred to in Article 17(8), and shall transmit that report to the European Parliament, the Council, the Commission, the Court of Auditors, the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions by 15 June of each year. The annual report on the activities of the Agency shall contain an independent section, approved by the Board of Regulators, concerning the regulatory activities of the Agency during the year considered.
13.   The Administrative Board shall adopt and publish its own rules of procedure.
