Article 23
Establishment of the budget
1.   By 15 February each year, the Director shall draw up a preliminary draft budget covering the operational expenditure and the programme of work anticipated for the following financial year, and shall forward that preliminary draft budget to the Administrative Board, together with a list of provisional posts. Each year, the Administrative Board shall, on the basis of the preliminary draft budget prepared by the Director, make an estimate of revenue and expenditure of the Agency for the following financial year. That estimate, including a draft establishment plan, shall be transmitted by the Administrative Board to the Commission by 31 March. Prior to adoption of the estimate, the draft prepared by the Director shall be transmitted to the Board of Regulators, which may deliver a reasoned opinion on the draft.
2.   The estimate referred to in paragraph 1 shall be transmitted by the Commission to the European Parliament and to the Council (the budgetary authority), together with the preliminary draft general budget of the European Union.
3.   On the basis of the estimate, the Commission shall enter into the preliminary draft general budget of the European Union the forecasts it considers necessary in respect of the establishment plan and the amount of the grant to be charged to the general budget of the European Union in accordance with Article 272 of the Treaty.
4.   The budgetary authority shall adopt the establishment plan for the Agency.
5.   The budget of the Agency shall be drawn up by the Administrative Board. It shall become final after the final adoption of the general budget of the European Union. Where necessary, it shall be adjusted accordingly.
6.   The Administrative Board shall, without delay, notify the budgetary authority of its intention to implement any project which may have significant financial implications for the funding of the budget of the Agency, in particular any project relating to property such as the rental or purchase of buildings. The Administrative Board shall also inform the Commission of its intention. If either branch of the budgetary authority intends to issue an opinion, it shall, within two weeks of receipt of the information on the project, notify the Agency of its intention thereof. In the absence of a reply, the Agency may proceed with the planned project.
