Article 13
Participating organisations
1.   The European Solidarity Corps shall be open to the participation of public or private entities, whether non-profit or profit-making, provided that they offer activities that correspond to the definition of solidarity activity within this Regulation and that they have received a quality label. In line with Regulation (EU, Euratom) 2018/1046, the grants shall not have the purpose or effect of producing a profit.
2.   An application from an entity to become a participating organisation shall be assessed by the competent implementing body of the European Solidarity Corps on the basis of the principles of equal treatment; equal opportunities and non-discrimination; avoidance of job substitution; provision of high-quality activities with learning dimension focusing on personal, socio-educational and professional development; adequate training, working and volunteering arrangements; safe and decent environment and conditions; and, the ‘no-profit principle’ in compliance with Regulation (EU, Euratom) 2018/1046. Adherence to those principles ascertains that activities of the participating organisations adhere to the requirements of the European Solidarity Corps. The quality label shall only be attributed to organisations committing to comply with these principles. Actual compliance shall be controlled in accordance with Articles 22 and 23 of this Regulation. Any entity which substantially changes its activities shall inform the competent implementing body for reassessment. The process for attributing the quality label for volunteering shall be differentiated from that for jobs and traineeships.
3.   As a result of the assessment, the entity may be attributed the quality label. The obtained label shall be re-assessed periodically, and may be revoked. In case the quality label is revoked, it may then be re-attributed following a new application and further assessment.
4.   Any entity which has received the quality label shall be given access to the European Solidarity Corps Portal, either in a host function, or in a supporting function, or both, and can make offers for solidarity activities to registered candidates.
5.   The quality label shall not automatically lead to funding under the European Solidarity Corps.
6.   The solidarity activities and related quality and support measures offered by a participating organisation may receive funding under the European Solidarity Corps or under another Union programme autonomously contributing to the objectives of the European Solidarity Corps and respecting its requirements or from other funding sources which do not depend on the Union budget.
