Article 21
European Commission
1.   The rules applying to the relationship between the Commission and a national agency shall be laid down, in accordance with the rules in Article 28 of Regulation (EU) No 1288/2013, in a written document. The document shall:
(a)
stipulate the internal control standards for national agencies and the rules for the management of the Union funds for grant support by the national agencies;
(b)
include the national agency work programme comprising the management tasks of the national agency to which Union support is provided;
(c)
specify the reporting requirements for the national agency.
2.   The Commission shall each year make the following funds available to the national agency:
(a)
funds for grant support in the participating country concerned for the actions of the European Solidarity Corps the management of which is entrusted to the national agency;
(b)
a financial contribution in support of the management tasks of the national agency defined in accordance with point (b) of Article 29(4) of Regulation (EU) No 1288/2013.
3.   The Commission shall lay down the requirements for the national agency work programme. The Commission shall not make European Solidarity Corps funds available to the national agency before having formally approved the national agency's work programme, taking into account the principles as set out in Article 5(2) and Article 24.
4.   On the basis of the compliance requirements for national agencies referred to in Article 27(4) of Regulation (EU) No 1288/2013, the Commission shall review the national management and control systems, the national agency's management declaration and the opinion of the independent audit body thereon, taking due account of the information provided by the national authority on its monitoring and supervision activities with regard to the European Solidarity Corps.
5.   After assessing the yearly management declaration and the opinion of the independent audit body thereon, the Commission shall address its opinion and observations to the national agency and the national authority.
6.   In the event that the Commission cannot accept the yearly management declaration or the independent audit opinion thereon, or in the event of unsatisfactory implementation by the national agency of the Commission's observations, the Commission may implement any precautionary and corrective measures necessary to safeguard the Union's financial interests in accordance with point (c) of Article 131(3) of Regulation (EU, Euratom) 2018/1046.
7.   The Commission shall organise regular meetings and trainings with and for the network of national agencies in order to ensure coherent implementation of the European Solidarity Corps across all participating countries. The Commission shall regularly consult key stakeholders, including participating organisations, on the implementation of the European Solidarity Corps.
