Article 15
Monitoring and evaluation of performance and results
1.   The Commission, in cooperation with the national authorities and national agencies in participating countries and involving participating organisations, as well as Union and national stakeholders such as youth organisations, shall regularly and effectively monitor the performance of the European Solidarity Corps in the achievement of its objectives. The Commission shall regularly consult key stakeholders, including participating organisations, on the implementation of the European Solidarity Corps.
2.   Based on the minimum framework of indicators set up in the Annex, at the latest by 6 April 2019, the Commission in cooperation with Member States shall establish, by way of implementing acts, a detailed programme for monitoring the outputs, results and impacts of the European Solidarity Corps. The detailed programme shall include an extended set of qualitative and quantitative indicators for that purpose, as well as timeline and methodology for such monitoring. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 25(2).
3.   In 2020, the Commission shall publish a report taking stock of the progress made towards achieving the objectives of the European Solidarity Corps.
4.   By 6 October 2022, the Commission shall carry out an independent evaluation of this Regulation to assess the efficiency, effectiveness and impact of the programme in view of the programme objectives and present a report on the main findings, including recommendations for the future of the programme, to the European Parliament, to the Council, to the Committee of the Regions and to the European Economic and Social Committee. As part of the evaluation, the Commission shall ensure regular consultation of all relevant stakeholders, including participants, participating organisations and the local communities concerned, as appropriate. The results of the evaluation shall feed back into future programme design and resource allocation proposals.
