Article 2
Definitions
For the purposes of this Directive:
1. "vehicle" means any vehicle designated as category M1 or N1 defined in Annex IIA to Directive 70/156/EEC, and three wheel motor vehicles as defined in Directive 92/61/EEC, but excluding motor tricycles;
2. "end-of life vehicle" means a vehicle which is waste within the meaning of Article 1(a) of Directive 75/442/EEC;
3. "producer" means the vehicle manufacturer or the professional importer of a vehicle into a Member State;
4. "prevention" means measures aiming at the reduction of the quantity and the harmfulness for the environment of end-of life vehicles, their materials and substances;
5. "treatment" means any activity after the end-of life vehicle has been handed over to a facility for depollution, dismantling, shearing, shredding, recovery or preparation for disposal of the shredder wastes, and any other operation carried out for the recovery and/or disposal of the end-of life vehicle and its components;
6. "reuse" means any operation by which components of end-of life vehicles are used for the same purpose for which they were conceived;
7. "recycling" means the reprocessing in a production process of the waste materials for the original purpose or for other purposes but excluding energy recovery. Energy recovery means the use of combustible waste as a means to generate energy through direct incineration with or without other waste but with recovery of the heat;
8. "recovery" means any of the applicable operations provided for in Annex IIB to Directive 75/442/EEC;
9. "disposal" means any of the applicable operations provided for in Annex IIA to Directive 75/442/EEC;
10. "economic operators" means producers, distributors, collectors, motor vehicle insurance companies, dismantlers, shredders, recoverers, recyclers and other treatment operators of end-of life vehicles, including their components and materials;
11. "hazardous substance" means any substance which is considered to be dangerous under Directive 67/548/EEC;
12. "shredder" means any device used for tearing into pieces or fragmenting end-of life vehicles, including for the purpose of obtaining directly reusable metal scrap;
13. "dismantling information" means all information required for the correct and environmentally sound treatment of end-of life vehicles. It shall be made available to authorised treatment facilities by vehicle manufacturers and component producers in the form of manuals or by means of electronic media (e.g. CD-ROM, on-line services).

