Article 7
Reuse and recovery
1. Member States shall take the necessary measures to encourage the reuse of components which are suitable for reuse, the recovery of components which cannot be reused and the giving of preference to recycling when environmentally viable, without prejudice to requirements regarding the safety of vehicles and environmental requirements such as air emissions and noise control.
2. Member States shall take the necessary measures to ensure that the following targets are attained by economic operators:
(a) no later than 1 January 2006, for all end-of life vehicles, the reuse and recovery shall be increased to a minimum of 85 % by an average weight per vehicle and year. Within the same time limit the reuse and recycling shall be increased to a minimum of 80 % by an average weight per vehicle and year;
for vehicles produced before 1 January 1980, Member States may lay down lower targets, but not lower than 75 % for reuse and recovery and not lower than 70 % for reuse and recycling. Member States making use of this subparagraph shall inform the Commission and the other Member States of the reasons therefor;
(b) no later than 1 January 2015, for all end-of life vehicles, the reuse and recovery shall be increased to a minimum of 95 % by an average weight per vehicle and year. Within the same time limit, the re-use and recycling shall be increased to a minimum of 85 % by an average weight per vehicle and year.
By 31 December 2005 at the latest the European Parliament and the Council shall re-examine the targets referred to in paragraph (b) on the basis of a report of the Commission, accompanied by a proposal. In its report the Commission shall take into account the development of the material composition of vehicles and any other relevant environmental aspects related to vehicles.
The Commission shall, in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 11, establish the detailed rules necessary to control compliance of Member States with the targets set out in this paragraph. In doing so the Commission shall take into account all relevant factors, inter alia the availability of data and the issue of exports and imports of end-of life vehicles. The Commission shall take this measure not later than 21 October 2002.
3. On the basis of a proposal from the Commission, the European Parliament and the Council shall establish targets for reuse and recovery and for reuse and recycling for the years beyond 2015.
4. In order to prepare an amendment to Directive 70/156/EEC, the Commission shall promote the preparation of European standards relating to the dismantlability, recoverability and recyclability of vehicles. Once the standards are agreed, but in any case no later than by the end of 2001, the European Parliament and the Council, on the basis of a proposal from the Commission, shall amend Directive 70/156/EEC so that vehicles type-approved in accordance with that Directive and put on the market after three years after the amendment of the Directive 70/156/EEC are re-usable and/or recyclable to a minimum of 85 % by weight per vehicle and are re-usable and/or recoverable to a minimum of 95 % by weight per vehicle.
5. In proposing the amendment to Directive 70/156/EEC relating to the ability to be dismantled, recoverability and recyclability of vehicles, the Commission shall take into account as appropriate the need to ensure that the reuse of components does not give rise to safety or environmental hazards.

