Article 6
Treatment
1. Member States shall take the necessary measures to ensure that all end-of life vehicles are stored (even temporarily) and treated in accordance with the general requirements laid down in Article 4 of Directive 75/442/EEC, and in compliance with the minimum technical requirements set out in Annex I to this Directive, without prejudice to national regulations on health and environment.
2. Member States shall take the necessary measures to ensure that any establishment or undertaking carrying out treatment operations obtains a permit from or be registered with the competent authorities, in compliance with Articles 9, 10 and 11 of Directive 75/442/EEC.
The derogation from the permit requirement referred to in Article 11(1)(b) of Directive 75/442/EEC may apply to recovery operations concerning waste of end-of life vehicles after they have been treated according to Annex 1(3) to this Directive if there is an inspection by the competent authorities before the registration. This inspection shall verify:
(a) type and quantities of waste to be treated;
(b) general technical requirements to be complied with;
(c) safety precautions to be taken,
in order to achieve the objectives referred to in Article 4 of Directive 75/442/EEC. This inspection shall take place once a year. Member States using the derogation shall send the results to the Commission.
3. Member States shall take the necessary measures to ensure that any establishment or undertaking carrying out treatment operations fulfils at least the following obligations in accordance with Annex I:
(a) end-of life vehicles shall be stripped before further treatment or other equivalent arrangements are made in order to reduce any adverse impact on the environment. Components or materials labelled or otherwise made identifiable in accordance with Article 4(2) shall be stripped before further treatment;
(b) hazardous materials and components shall be removed and segregated in a selective way so as not to contaminate subsequent shredder waste from end-of life vehicles;
(c) stripping operations and storage shall be carried out in such a way as to ensure the suitability of vehicle components for reuse and recovery, and in particular for recycling.
Treatment operations for depollution of end-of life vehicles as referred to in Annex I(3) shall be carried out as soon as possible.
4. Member States shall take the necessary measures to ensure that the permit or registration referred to in paragraph 2 includes all conditions necessary for compliance with the requirements of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3.
5. Member States shall encourage establishments or undertakings, which carry out treatment operations to introduce, certified environmental management systems.

