2.   Notwithstanding Article 5(7) of Regulation (EC) No 1072/2009, the validity of the driver attestations which would otherwise have expired or would otherwise expire between 1 March 2020 and 31 August 2020 shall be deemed to be, or to have been, extended for a period of six months.
3.   Where a Member State considers that the renewal of Community licences or of driver attestations is likely to remain impracticable beyond 31 August 2020, due to measures that it has taken to prevent or contain the spread of COVID‐19, it may submit a reasoned request for an authorisation to apply an extension of the periods specified in paragraphs 1 and 2, as relevant. That request may concern the period between 1 March 2020 and 31 August 2020 or the period of six months, or both. It shall be submitted to the Commission by 1 August 2020.
4.   Where, upon a request submitted in accordance with paragraph 3, the Commission finds that the requirements laid down in that paragraph are fulfilled, it shall adopt a decision authorising the Member State concerned to apply an extension of the periods specified in paragraphs 1 and 2, respectively, as justified in each case. The extension shall be limited to reflect the period during which the renewal of Community licences or of driver attestations is likely to remain impracticable and, in any event, shall not be longer than six months.
The Commission shall publish that decision in the Official Journal of the European Union.
5.   Where a Member State has not been, and is likely not to be, confronted by difficulties that rendered the renewal of Community licences or of driver attestations impracticable during the period between 1 March 2020 and 31 August 2020 as a consequence of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the COVID‐19 outbreak, or has taken appropriate national measures to mitigate such difficulties, that Member State may decide not to apply paragraphs 1 and 2, after first informing the Commission. The Commission shall inform the other Member States thereof and shall publish a notice in the Official Journal of the European Union.
The Member State that has decided not to apply paragraphs 1 and 2 as provided for in the first subparagraph shall not impede the cross‐border activities of any economic operator or individual that has relied on derogations set out in paragraphs 1 and 2 that apply in another Member State.
