Article 22
Recovery and destruction of used controlled substances
1.   Controlled substances contained in refrigeration, air-conditioning and heat pump equipment, equipment containing solvents or fire protection systems and fire extinguishers shall, during the maintenance or servicing of equipment or before the dismantling or disposal of equipment, be recovered for destruction, recycling or reclamation.
2.   Controlled substances and products containing such substances shall only be destroyed by approved technologies listed in Annex VII or, in the case of controlled substances not referred to in that Annex, by the most environmentally acceptable destruction technology not entailing excessive costs, provided that the use of those technologies complies with Community and national legislation on waste and that additional requirements under such legislation are met.
3.   The Commission may amend Annex VII in order to take new technological developments into account.
Those measures, designed to amend non-essential elements of this Regulation, shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 25(3).
4.   Controlled substances contained in products and equipment other than those mentioned in paragraph 1 shall, if technically and economically feasible, be recovered for destruction, recycling or reclamation, or shall be destroyed without prior recovery, applying the technologies referred to in paragraph 2.
The Commission shall establish an Annex to this Regulation with a list of products and equipment for which the recovery of controlled substances or destruction of products and equipment without prior recovery of controlled substances shall be considered technically and economically feasible, specifying, if appropriate, the technologies to be applied. Any draft measure to establish such an Annex shall be accompanied and supported by a full economic assessment of costs and benefits, taking into account the individual circumstances of Member States.
Those measures, designed to amend non-essential elements of this Regulation, inter alia, by supplementing it, shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 25(3).
5.   Member States shall take steps to promote the recovery, recycling, reclamation and destruction of controlled substances and shall define the minimum qualification requirements for the personnel involved.
The Commission shall evaluate the measures taken by the Member States and may in the light of this evaluation and of technical and other relevant information, as appropriate, adopt measures regarding those minimum qualification requirements.
Those measures, designed to amend non-essential elements of this Regulation, inter alia, by supplementing it, shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 25(3).
