Article 11
Production, placing on the market and use of hydrochlorofluorocarbons and placing on the market of products and equipment containing or relying on hydrochlorofluorocarbons
1.   By way of derogation from Article 4, hydrochlorofluorocarbons may be produced provided that each producer ensures the following:
(a)
the calculated level of its production of hydrochlorofluorocarbons in the period from 1 January 2010 to 31 December 2010 and in each 12-month period thereafter until 31 December 2013 does not exceed 35 % of the calculated level of its production of hydrochlorofluorocarbons in 1997;
(b)
the calculated level of its production of hydrochlorofluorocarbons in the period from 1 January 2014 to 31 December 2014 and in each 12-month period thereafter until 31 December 2016 does not exceed 14 % of the calculated level of its production of hydrochlorofluorocarbons in 1997;
(c)
the calculated level of its production of hydrochlorofluorocarbons in the period from 1 January 2017 to 31 December 2017 and in each 12-month period thereafter until 31 December 2019 does not exceed 7 % of the calculated level of its production of hydrochlorofluorocarbons in 1997;
(d)
it produces no hydrochlorofluorocarbons after 31 December 2019.
2.   By way of derogation from Article 4 and Article 5(1), hydrochlorofluorocarbons may be produced, placed on the market and used for laboratory and analytical uses.
Article 10(3) to (7) shall apply mutatis mutandis.
3.   By way of derogation from Article 5, until 31 December 2014, reclaimed hydrochlorofluorocarbons may be placed on the market and used for the maintenance or servicing of existing refrigeration, air-conditioning and heat pump equipment, provided that the container is labelled with an indication that the substance has been reclaimed and with information on the batch number and name and address of the reclamation facility.
4.   Until 31 December 2014, recycled hydrochlorofluorocarbons may be used for the maintenance or servicing of existing refrigeration, air-conditioning and heat pump equipment provided that they have been recovered from such equipment and may only be used by the undertaking which carried out the recovery as part of maintenance or servicing or for which the recovery as part of maintenance or servicing was carried out.
5.   By way of derogation from Article 5, until 31 December 2019, hydrochlorofluorocarbons may be placed on the market for repackaging and subsequent export. Any undertaking carrying out the repackaging and subsequent export of hydrochlorofluorocarbons shall register with the Commission, indicating the controlled substances concerned, their estimated annual demand and the suppliers of those substances, and shall update this information when changes occur.
6.   When reclaimed or recycled hydrochlorofluorocarbons are used for maintenance or servicing, the refrigeration, air-conditioning and heat pump equipment concerned shall be labelled with an indication of the type of substance, its quantity contained in the equipment and the label elements set out in Annex I to Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008 for substances or mixtures classified as Hazardous to the Ozone Layer.
7.   Undertakings operating the equipment referred to in paragraph 4 containing a fluid charge of 3 kg or more shall keep a record of the quantity and type of substance recovered and added, and of the company or technician which performed the maintenance or servicing.
Undertakings using reclaimed or recycled hydrochlorofluorocarbons for maintenance or servicing shall keep a record of the undertakings that have supplied reclaimed hydrochlorofluorocarbons and of the source of recycled hydrochlorofluorocarbons.
8.   By way of derogation from Articles 5 and 6, the Commission may, following a request by a competent authority of a Member State and in accordance with the management procedure referred to in Article 25(2), authorise a time-limited exemption to allow the use and placing on the market of hydrochlorofluorocarbons and of products and equipment containing or relying on hydrochlorofluorocarbons where it is demonstrated that, for a particular use, technically and economically feasible alternative substances or technologies are not available or cannot be used.
This exemption may not be authorised for a period which extends beyond 31 December 2019.
