Article 20
Trade with a State not party to the Protocol and a territory not covered by the Protocol
1.   Import and export of controlled substances and of products and equipment containing or relying on controlled substances from and to any State not party to the Protocol shall be prohibited.
2.   The Commission may adopt rules applicable to the release for free circulation in the Community of products and equipment imported from any State not party to the Protocol which were produced using controlled substances but do not contain substances which can be positively identified as controlled substances. The identification of such products and equipment shall comply with periodical technical advice given to the Parties. Those measures, designed to amend non-essential elements of this Regulation, inter alia, by supplementing it, shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 25(3).
3.   By way of derogation from paragraph 1, trade with any State not party to the Protocol in controlled substances and products and equipment containing or relying on such substances or which are produced by means of one or more such substances may be authorised by the Commission, to the extent that the State not party to the Protocol is determined by a meeting of the Parties pursuant to Article 4(8) of the Protocol to be in full compliance with the Protocol and has submitted data to that effect as specified in Article 7 of the Protocol. The Commission shall act in accordance with the management procedure referred to in Article 25(2) of this Regulation.
4.   Subject to any decision taken under the second subparagraph, paragraph 1 shall apply to any territory not covered by the Protocol as they apply to any State not party to the Protocol.
Where the authorities of a territory not covered by the Protocol are in full compliance with the Protocol and have submitted data to that effect as specified in Article 7 of the Protocol, the Commission may decide that some or all of the provisions of paragraph 1 of this Article shall not apply in respect of that territory.
The Commission shall act in accordance with the management procedure referred to in Article 25(2).
