Article 8
Production, placing on the market and use of controlled substances as process agents
1.   By way of derogation from Articles 4 and 5, controlled substances may be produced, placed on the market and used as process agents.
2.   Controlled substances may only be used as process agents in installations existing on 1 September 1997, and where emissions are insignificant.
3.   Controlled substances produced or placed on the market as process agents may only be used for that purpose. As of 1 July 2010, containers of such substances shall be labelled with a clear indication that those substances may only be used as process agents. Where such substances are required to be labelled in accordance with Directive 67/548/EEC, Directive 1999/45/EC or Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008, such indication shall be included in the label referred to in those Directives or in the supplemental information part of the label as referred to in Article 25(3) of that Regulation.
The Commission may determine the form and content of the label to be used. Those measures, designed to amend non-essential elements of this Regulation, inter alia, by supplementing it, shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 25(3).
4.   The Commission shall, if appropriate, in accordance with the management procedure referred to in Article 25(2), establish a list of undertakings in which the use of controlled substances as process agents shall be permitted, laying down maximum quantities that may be used for make-up or for consumption as process agents and emission levels for each of the undertakings concerned.
The maximum amount of controlled substances that may be used as process agents within the Community shall not exceed 1 083 metric tonnes per year.
The maximum amount of controlled substances that may be emitted from process agent uses within the Community shall not exceed 17 metric tonnes per year.
5.   In the light of new information or technical developments or decisions taken by the Parties, the Commission shall, if appropriate:
(a)
amend Annex III;
(b)
amend the maximum amount of controlled substances that may be used as process agents or emitted from process agent uses as referred to in the second and third subparagraphs of paragraph 4.
Those measures, designed to amend non-essential elements of this Regulation, shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 25(3).
