Article 14
Transfer of rights and industrial rationalisation
1.   Any producer or importer entitled to place controlled substances on the market or use them for its own account may transfer that right in respect of all or any quantities of the respective group of substances fixed in accordance with this Article to any other producer or importer of that group of substances within the Community. Any such transfer shall be notified in advance to the Commission. The transfer of the right to place on the market or use shall not imply the further right to produce or to import.
2.   To the extent permitted by the Protocol, the competent authority of the Member State in which a producer’s relevant production is situated may authorise that producer to exceed the calculated levels of production laid down in Article 10 and Article 11(2) for the purpose of industrial rationalisation within the Member State concerned, provided that the calculated levels of production of that Member State do not exceed the sum of the calculated levels of production of its domestic producers as laid down in Article 10 and Article 11(2) for the periods in question. The competent authority of the Member State concerned shall notify the Commission in advance of its intention to issue any such authorisation.
3.   To the extent permitted by the Protocol, the Commission may, in agreement with the competent authority of the Member State in which a producer’s relevant production is situated, authorise that producer to exceed the calculated levels of production laid down in Article 10 and Article 11(2) for the purpose of industrial rationalisation between Member States, provided that the combined calculated levels of production of the Member States concerned do not exceed the sum of the calculated levels of production of their domestic producers as laid down in Article 10 and Article 11(2) for the periods in question. The agreement of the competent authority of the Member State in which it is intended to reduce production shall also be required.
4.   To the extent permitted by the Protocol, the Commission may, in agreement with both the competent authority of the Member State in which a producer’s relevant production is situated and the government of the third country Party concerned, authorise a producer to combine the calculated levels of production laid down in Article 10 and Article 11(2) with the calculated levels of production allowed to a producer in a third country Party under the Protocol and that producer’s national legislation for the purpose of industrial rationalisation with a third country Party, provided that the combined calculated levels of production by the two producers do not exceed the sum of the calculated levels of production allowed to the Community producer under Article 10 and Article 11(2) and the calculated levels of production allowed to the third country Party producer under the Protocol and any relevant national legislation.
