Article 12
Alternative calculations
1. Until the end of 2010 and subject to prior approval by the Commission, Member States may use other methods than the one provided for in Annex II(b) to subtract possible electricity production not produced in a cogeneration process from the reported figures. However, for the purposes referred to in Article 5(1) and in Article 10(3), the quantity of electricity from cogeneration shall be determined in accordance with Annex II.
2. Member States may calculate primary energy savings from a production of heat and electricity and mechanical energy according to Annex III(c), without using Annex II to exclude the non-cogenerated heat and electricity parts of the same process. Such a production can be regarded as high-efficiency cogeneration provided it fulfils the efficiency criteria in Annex III(a) and, for cogeneration units with an electrical capacity larger than 25 MW, the overall efficiency is above 70 %. However, specification of the quantity of electricity from cogeneration produced in such a production, for issuing a guarantee of origin and for statistical purposes, shall be determined in accordance with Annex II.
3. Until the end of 2010, Member States may, using an alternative methodology, define a cogeneration as high-efficiency cogeneration without verifying that the cogeneration production fulfils the criteria in Annex III(a), if it is proved on national level that the cogeneration production identified by such an alternative calculation methodology on average fulfils the criteria in Annex III(a). If a guarantee of origin is issued for such production then the efficiency of the cogeneration production specified on the guarantee shall not exceed the threshold values of the criteria in Annex III(a) unless calculations in accordance with Annex III prove otherwise. However, specification of the quantity of electricity from cogeneration produced in such a production, for issuing a guarantee of origin and for statistical purposes, shall be determined in accordance with Annex II.

