Article 41
Operation of a bridge institution
1.   Member States shall ensure that the operation of a bridge institution respects the following requirements:
(a)
the contents of the bridge institution’s constitutional documents are approved by the resolution authority;
(b)
subject to the bridge institution’s ownership structure, the resolution authority either appoints or approves the bridge institution’s management body;
(c)
the resolution authority approves the remuneration of the members of the management body and determines their appropriate responsibilities;
(d)
the resolution authority approves the strategy and risk profile of the bridge institution;
(e)
the bridge institution is authorised in accordance with Directive 2013/36/EU or Directive 2014/65/EU, as applicable, and has the necessary authorisation under the applicable national law to carry out the activities or services that it acquires by virtue of a transfer made pursuant to Article 63 of this Directive;
(f)
the bridge institution complies with the requirements of, and is subject to supervision in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 and with Directives 2013/36/EU and Directive 2014/65/EU, as applicable;
(g)
the operation of the bridge institution shall be in accordance with the Union State aid framework and the resolution authority may specify restrictions on its operations accordingly.
Notwithstanding the provisions referred to in points (e) and (f) of the first subparagraph and where necessary to meet the resolution objectives, the bridge institution may be established and authorised without complying with Directive 2013/36/EU or Directive 2014/65/EU for a short period of time at the beginning of its operation. To that end, the resolution authority shall submit a request in that sense to the competent authority. If the competent authority decides to grant such an authorisation, it shall indicate the period for which the bridge institution is waived from complying with the requirements of those Directives.
2.   Subject to any restrictions imposed in accordance with Union or national competition rules, the management of the bridge institution shall operate the bridge institution with a view to maintaining access to critical functions and selling the institution or entity referred to in point (b), (c) or (d) of Article 1(1), its assets, rights or liabilities, to one or more private sector purchasers when conditions are appropriate and within the period specified in paragraph 4 of this Article or, where applicable, paragraph 6 of this Article.
3.   The resolution authority shall take a decision that the bridge institution is no longer a bridge institution within the meaning of Article 40(2) in any of the following cases, whichever occurs first:
(a)
the bridge institution merges with another entity;
(b)
the bridge institution ceases to meet the requirements of Article 40(2);
(c)
the sale of all or substantially all of the bridge institution’s assets, rights or liabilities to a third party;
(d)
the expiry of the period specified in paragraph 5 or, where applicable, paragraph 6;
(e)
the bridge institution’s assets are completely wound down and its liabilities are completely discharged.
4.   Member States shall ensure, in cases when the resolution authority seeks to sell the bridge institution or its assets, rights or liabilities, that the bridge institution or the relevant assets or liabilities are marketed openly and transparently, and that the sale does not materially misrepresent them or unduly favour or discriminate between potential purchasers.
Any such sale shall be made on commercial terms, having regard to the circumstances and in accordance with the Union State aid framework.
5.   If none of the outcomes referred to in points (a), (b), (c) and (e) of paragraph 3 applies, the resolution authority shall terminate the operation of a bridge institution as soon as possible and in any event two years after the date on which the last transfer from an institution under resolution pursuant to the bridge institution tool was made.
6.   The resolution authority may extend the period referred to in paragraph 5 for one or more additional one-year periods where such an extension:
(a)
supports the outcomes referred to in point (a), (b), (c) or (e) of paragraph 3; or
(b)
is necessary to ensure the continuity of essential banking or financial services.
7.   Any decision of the resolution authority to extend the period referred to in paragraph 5 shall be reasoned and shall contain a detailed assessment of the situation, including of the market conditions and outlook, that justifies the extension.
8.   Where the operations of a bridge institution are terminated in the circumstances referred to in point (c) or (d) of paragraph 3, the bridge institution shall be wound up under normal insolvency proceedings.
Subject to Article 37(7), any proceeds generated as a result of the termination of the operation of the bridge institution shall benefit the shareholders of the bridge institution.
9.   Where a bridge institution is used for the purpose of transferring assets and liabilities of more than one institution under resolution the obligation referred to in paragraph 8 shall refer to the assets and liabilities transferred from each of the institutions under resolution and not to the bridge institution itself.
