Article 106
Borrowing between financing arrangements
1.   Member States shall ensure that financing arrangements under their jurisdiction may make a request to borrow from all other financing arrangements within the Union, in the event that:
(a)
the amounts raised under Article 103 are not sufficient to cover the losses, costs or other expenses incurred by the use of the financing arrangements;
(b)
the extraordinary ex-post contributions provided for in Article 104 are not immediately accessible; and
(c)
the alternative funding means provided for in Article 105 are not immediately accessible on reasonable terms.
2.   Member States shall ensure that financing arrangements under their jurisdiction have the power to lend to other financing arrangements within the Union in the circumstances specified in paragraph 1.
3.   Following a request under paragraph 1, each of the other financing arrangements in the Union shall decide whether to lend to the financing arrangement which has made the request. Member States may require that that decision is taken after consulting, or with the consent of, the competent ministry or the government. The decision shall be taken with due urgency.
4.   The rate of interest, repayment period and other terms and conditions of the loans shall be agreed between the borrowing financing arrangement and the other financing arrangements which have decided to participate. The loan of every participating financing arrangement shall have the same interest rate, repayment period and other terms and conditions, unless all participating financing arrangements agree otherwise.
5.   The amount lent by each participating resolution financing arrangement shall be pro rata to the amount of covered deposits in the Member State of that resolution financing arrangement, with respect to the aggregate of covered deposits in the Member States of participating resolution financing arrangements. Those rates of contribution may vary upon agreement of all participating financing arrangements.
6.   An outstanding loan to a resolution financing arrangement of another Member State under this Article shall be treated as an asset of the resolution financing arrangement which provided the loan and may be counted towards that financing arrangement’s target level.
