Article 59
Requirement to write down or convert capital instruments
1.   The power to write down or convert relevant capital instruments may be exercised either:
(a)
independently of resolution action; or
(b)
in combination with a resolution action, where the conditions for resolution specified in Articles 32 and 33 are met.
2.   Member States shall ensure that the resolution authorities have the power to write down or convert relevant capital instruments into shares or other instruments of ownership of institutions and entities referred to in points (b), (c) and (d) of Article 1(1).
3.   Member States shall require that resolution authorities exercise the write down or conversion power, in accordance with Article 60 and without delay, in relation to relevant capital instruments issued by an institution or an entity referred to in point (b), (c) or (d) of Article 1(1) when one or more of the following circumstances apply:
(a)
where the determination has been made that conditions for resolution specified in Articles 32 and 33 have been met, before any resolution action is taken;
(b)
the appropriate authority determines that unless that power is exercised in relation to the relevant capital instruments, the institution or the entity referred to in point (b), (c) or (d) of Article 1(1) will no longer be viable;
(c)
in the case of relevant capital instruments issued by a subsidiary and where those capital instruments are recognised for the purposes of meeting own funds requirements on an individual and on a consolidated basis, the appropriate authority of the Member State of the consolidating supervisor and the appropriate authority of the Member State of the subsidiary make a joint determination taking the form of a joint decision in accordance with Article 92(3) and (4) that unless the write down or conversion power is exercised in relation to those instruments, the group will no longer be viable;
(d)
in the case of relevant capital instruments issued at the level of the parent undertaking and where those capital instruments are recognised for the purposes of meeting own funds requirements on an individual basis at the level of the parent undertaking or on a consolidated basis, and the appropriate authority of the Member State of the consolidating supervisor makes a determination that unless the write down or conversion power is exercised in relation to those instruments, the group will no longer be viable;
(e)
extraordinary public financial support is required by the institution or the entity referred to in point (b), (c) or (d) of Article 1(1) except in any of the circumstances set out in point (d)(iii) of Article 32(4).
4.   For the purposes of paragraph 3, an institution or an entity referred to in point (b), (c) or (d) of Article 1(1) or a group shall be deemed to be no longer viable only if both of the following conditions are met:
(a)
the institution or the entity referred to in point (b), (c) or (d) of Article 1(1) or the group is failing or likely to fail;
(b)
having regard to timing and other relevant circumstances, there is no reasonable prospect that any action, including alternative private sector measures or supervisory action (including early intervention measures), other than the write down or conversion of capital instruments, independently or in combination with a resolution action, would prevent the failure of the institution or the entity referred to in point (b), (c) or (d) of Article 1(1) or the group within a reasonable timeframe.
5.   For the purposes of point (a) of paragraph 4 of this Article, an institution or an entity referred to in point (b), (c) or (d) of Article 1(1) shall be deemed to be failing or likely to fail where one or more of the circumstances set out in Article 32(4) occurs.
6.   For the purposes of point (a) of paragraph 4, a group shall be deemed to be failing or likely to fail where the group infringes or there are objective elements to support a determination that the group, in the near future, will infringe its consolidated prudential requirements in a way that would justify action by the competent authority including but not limited to because the group has incurred or is likely to incur losses that will deplete all or a significant amount of its own funds.
7.   A relevant capital instrument issued by a subsidiary shall not be written down to a greater extent or converted on worse terms pursuant to point (c) of paragraph 3 than equally ranked capital instruments at the level of the parent undertaking which have been written down or converted.
8.   Where an appropriate authority makes a determination referred to in paragraph 3 of this Article, it shall immediately notify the resolution authority responsible for the institution or for the entity referred to in point (b), (c) or (d) of Article 1(1) in question, if different.
9.   Before making a determination referred to in point (c) of paragraph 3of this Article in relation to a subsidiary that issues relevant capital instruments that are recognised for the purposes of meeting the own funds requirements on an individual and on a consolidated basis, the appropriate authority shall comply with the notification and consultation requirements laid down in Article 62.
10.   Before exercising the power to write down or convert capital instruments, resolution authorities shall ensure that a valuation of the assets and liabilities of the institution or the entity referred to in point (b), (c) or (d) of Article 1(1) is carried out in accordance with Article 36. That valuation shall form the basis of the calculation of the write down to be applied to the relevant capital instruments in order to absorb losses and the level of conversion to be applied to relevant capital instruments in order to recapitalise the institution or the entity referred to in point (b), (c) or (d) of Article 1(1).
