Article 110
Administrative penalties and other administrative measures
1.   Without prejudice to the right of Member States to provide for and impose criminal penalties, Member States shall lay down rules on administrative penalties and other administrative measures applicable where the national provisions transposing this Directive have not been complied with, and shall take all measures necessary to ensure that they are implemented. Where Member States decide not to lay down rules for administrative penalties for infringements which are subject to national criminal law they shall communicate to the Commission the relevant criminal law provisions. The administrative penalties and other administrative measures shall be effective, proportionate and dissuasive.
2.   Member States shall ensure that, where obligations referred to in the first paragraph apply to institutions, financial institutions and Union parent undertakings, in the event of an infringement, administrative penalties can be applied, subject to the conditions laid down in national law, to the members of the management body, and to other natural persons who under national law are responsible for the infringement.
3.   The powers to impose administrative penalties provided for in this Directive shall be attributed to resolution authorities or, where different, to competent authorities, depending on the type of infringement. Resolution authorities and competent authorities shall have all information-gathering and investigatory powers that are necessary for the exercise of their respective functions. In the exercise of their powers to impose penalties, resolution authorities and competent authorities shall cooperate closely to ensure that administrative penalties or other administrative measures produce the desired results and coordinate their action when dealing with cross-border cases.
4.   Resolution authorities and competent authorities shall exercise their administrative powers to impose penalties in accordance with this Directive and national law in any of the following ways:
(a)
directly;
(b)
in collaboration with other authorities;
(c)
under their responsibility by delegation to such authorities;
(d)
by application to the competent judicial authorities.
