Article 102
Target level
1.   Member States shall ensure that, by 31 December 2024, the available financial means of their financing arrangements reach at least 1 % of the amount of covered deposits of all the institutions authorised in their territory. Member States may set target levels in excess of that amount.
2.   During the initial period of time referred to in paragraph 1, contributions to the financing arrangements raised in accordance with Article 103 shall be spread out in time as evenly as possible until the target level is reached, but with due account of the phase of the business cycle and the impact pro-cyclical contributions may have on the financial position of contributing institutions.
Member States may extend the initial period of time for a maximum of four years if the financing arrangements have made cumulative disbursements in excess of 0,5 % of covered deposits of all the institutions authorised in their territory which are guaranteed under Directive 2014/49/EU.
3.   If, after the initial period of time referred to in paragraph 1, the available financial means diminish below the target level specified in that paragraph, the regular contributions raised in accordance with Article 103 shall resume until the target level is reached. After the target level has been reached for the first time and where the available financial means have subsequently been reduced to less than two thirds of the target level, those contributions shall be set at a level allowing for reaching the target level within six years.
The regular contribution shall take due account of the phase of the business cycle, and the impact procyclical contributions may have when setting annual contributions in the context of this paragraph.
4.   EBA shall submit a report to the Commission by 31 October 2016 with recommendations on the appropriate reference point for setting the target level for resolution financing arrangements, and in particular whether total liabilities constitute a more appropriate basis than covered deposits.
5.   Based on the results of the report referred to in paragraph 4, the Commission shall, if appropriate, submit, by 31 December 2016, to the European Parliament and to the Council a legislative proposal on the basis for the target level for resolution financing arrangements.
