Article 1
Directive 2003/87/EC is amended as follows:
(1)
in Article 3c, the following paragraph is inserted:
‘3a.   Any allocation of allowances for aviation activities to and from aerodromes located in countries outside the European Economic Area (“EEA”) after 31 December 2023 shall be subject to the review referred to in Article 28b.’;
(2)
in Article 3d, paragraph 2 is replaced by the following:
‘2.   From 1 January 2013, 15 % of allowances shall be auctioned. The Commission shall undertake a study on the ability of the aviation sector to pass on the cost of CO2 to its customers, in relation to the EU ETS and to the global market-based measure developed by the International Civil Aviation Organization (“ICAO”). The study shall assess the ability of the aviation sector to pass on the cost of required emission units, comparing this to industries and to the power sector, with the intention of making a proposal to increase the percentage of auctioning pursuant to the review referred to in Article 28b(2), taking into account the analysis of costs passed on and considering alignment with other sectors and the competitiveness between different modes of transport.’;
(3)
in Article 3d, paragraph 4 is replaced by the following:
‘4.   All revenues generated from the auctioning of allowances should be used to tackle climate change in the Union and third countries, inter alia, to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, to adapt to the impacts of climate change in the Union and third countries, especially developing countries, to fund research and development for mitigation and adaptation, including in particular in the fields of aeronautics and air transport, to reduce emissions through low-emission transport and to cover the cost of administering the EU ETS. Auctioning revenues should also be used to fund common projects to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from the aviation sector, such as the Single European Sky ATM Research (SESAR) Joint Undertaking and the Clean Sky Joint Technology Initiatives and any initiatives enabling the widespread use of GNSS for satellite-based navigation and interoperable capabilities within all Member States, in particular projects that improve air navigation infrastructure, the provision of air navigation services and the use of airspace. The proceeds of auctioning may also be used to fund contributions to the Global Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Fund, and measures to avoid deforestation. Special consideration shall be given by Member States that use those revenues for co-financing research and innovation to programmes or initiatives under the Ninth Research Framework Programme (“FP9”). Transparency on the use of revenues generated from the auctioning of allowances under this Directive is essential to meeting Union commitments.
Member States shall inform the Commission of actions taken pursuant to the first subparagraph of this paragraph.’;
(4)
in Article 12, paragraph 3 is replaced by the following:
‘3.   For the period until 31 December 2020, Member States shall ensure that, by 30 April each year, the operator of each installation surrenders a number of allowances, other than allowances issued under Chapter II, that is equal to the total emissions from that installation during the preceding calendar year as verified in accordance with Article 15, and that those allowances are subsequently cancelled. For the period starting from 1 January 2021, Member States shall ensure that, by 30 April each year, the operator of each installation surrenders a number of allowances, that is equal to the total emissions from that installation during the preceding calendar year as verified in accordance with Article 15, and that those allowances are subsequently cancelled, subject to the review referred to in Article 28b.’;
(5)
in Article 12, the following paragraph is inserted before paragraph 3a:
‘3-a.   Where necessary, and for as long as is necessary, in order to protect the environmental integrity of the EU ETS, aircraft operators and other operators in the EU ETS shall be prohibited from using allowances that are issued by a Member State in respect of which there are obligations lapsing for aircraft operators and other operators. The legal act referred to in Article 19 shall include the measures necessary in the cases referred to in this paragraph.’;
(6)
Article 28a is amended as follows:
(a)
the title is replaced by the following:
‘Derogations applicable in advance of the implementation of the ICAO's global market-based measure’;
(b)
paragraph 1 is amended as follows:
(i)
points (a) and (b) are replaced by the following:
‘(a)
all emissions from flights to and from aerodromes located in countries outside the EEA in each calendar year from 1 January 2013 to 31 December 2023, subject to the review referred to in Article 28b;
(b)
all emissions from flights between an aerodrome located in an outermost region within the meaning of Article 349 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union and an aerodrome located in another region of the EEA in each calendar year from 1 January 2013 to 31 December 2023, subject to the review referred to in Article 28b.’;
(ii)
point (c) is deleted;
(c)
paragraph 2 is replaced by the following:
‘2.   By way of derogation from Articles 3e and 3f, aircraft operators benefiting from the derogations provided for in points (a) and (b) of paragraph 1 of this Article shall be issued, each year, with a number of free allowances reduced in proportion to the reduction of the surrender obligation provided for in those points.
By way of derogation from Article 3f(8), allowances that are not allocated from the special reserve shall be cancelled.
From 1 January 2021, the number of allowances allocated to aircraft operators shall be subject to the application of the linear factor referred to in Article 9, subject to the review referred to in Article 28b.
As regards activity in the period from 1 January 2017 to 31 December 2023, Member States shall, before 1 September 2018, publish the number of aviation allowances allocated to each aircraft operator.’;
(d)
paragraph 4 is replaced by the following:
‘4.   By way of derogation from Article 3d(3), the number of allowances to be auctioned by each Member State in respect of the period from 1 January 2013 to 31 December 2023 shall be reduced to correspond to its share of attributed aviation emissions from flights which are not subject to the derogations provided for in points (a) and (b) of paragraph 1 of this Article.’;
(e)
paragraph 6 is replaced by the following:
‘6.   By way of derogation from Articles 3g, 12, 15 and 18a, where an aircraft operator has total annual emissions lower than 25 000 tonnes of CO2, or where an aircraft operator has total annual emissions lower than 3 000 tonnes of CO2 from flights other than those referred to in points (a) and (b) of paragraph 1 of this Article, its emissions shall be considered to be verified emissions if determined by using the small emitters tool approved under Commission Regulation (EU) No 606/2010 (*1) and populated by Eurocontrol with data from its ETS support facility. Member States may implement simplified procedures for non-commercial aircraft operators as long as such procedures provide no less accuracy than the small emitters tool provides.

(*1)  Commission Regulation (EU) No 606/2010 of 9 July 2010 on the approval of a simplified tool developed by the European organisation for air safety navigation (Eurocontrol) to estimate the fuel consumption of certain small emitting aircraft operators (OJ L 175, 10.7.2010, p. 25).’;"
                        
(f)
paragraph 7 is replaced by the following:
‘7.   Paragraph 1 of this Article shall apply to countries with whom an agreement pursuant to Article 25 or 25a has been reached only in line with the terms of such agreement.’;
(g)
paragraph 8 is deleted;
(7)
the following Articles are inserted:
‘Article 28b
Reporting and review by the Commission concerning the implementation of the ICAO's global market-based measure
1.   Before 1 January 2019 and regularly thereafter, the Commission shall report to the European Parliament and to the Council on progress in the ICAO negotiations to implement the global market-based measure to be applied to emissions from 2021, in particular with regard to: (i) the relevant ICAO instruments, including Standards and Recommended Practices; (ii) ICAO Council-approved recommendations relevant to the global market-based measure; (iii) the establishment of a global registry; (iv) domestic measures taken by third countries to implement the global market-based measure to be applied to emissions from 2021; (v) the implications of reservations by third countries; and (vi) other relevant international developments and applicable instruments.
In line with the UNFCCC's global stocktake, the Commission shall also report on efforts to meet the aviation sector's aspirational long-term emissions reduction goal of halving aviation CO2 emissions relative to 2005 levels by 2050.
2.   Within 12 months of the adoption by the ICAO of the relevant instruments, and before the global market-based measure becomes operational, the Commission shall present a report to the European Parliament and to the Council in which it shall consider ways for those instruments to be implemented in Union law through a revision of this Directive. The Commission shall, in that report, also consider the rules applicable in respect of flights within the EEA, as appropriate. It shall also examine the ambition and overall environmental integrity of the global market-based measure, including its general ambition in relation to targets under the Paris Agreement, the level of participation, its enforceability, transparency, the penalties for non-compliance, the processes for public input, the quality of offset credits, monitoring, reporting and verification of emissions, registries, accountability as well as rules on the use of biofuels. In addition, the report shall consider whether the provisions adopted under Article 28c(2) need to be revised.
3.   The Commission shall accompany the report referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article with a proposal, where appropriate, to the European Parliament and to the Council to amend, delete, extend or replace the derogations provided for in Article 28a, that is consistent with the Union economy-wide greenhouse gas emission reduction commitment for 2030 with the aim of preserving the environmental integrity and effectiveness of Union climate action.
Article 28c
Provisions for monitoring, reporting and verification for the purpose of the global market-based measure
1.   The Commission shall adopt provisions for the appropriate monitoring, reporting and verification of emissions for the purpose of implementing the ICAO's global market-based measure on all routes covered by it. Those provisions shall be based on the relevant instruments adopted in the ICAO, shall avoid any distortion of competition, be consistent with the principles contained in the Regulation referred to in Article 14(1), and shall ensure that the emissions reports submitted are verified in accordance with the verification principles and criteria referred to in Article 15.
2.   The provisions referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article shall be adopted in accordance with the procedure referred to in Articles 14 and 15.’;
(8)
in Article 30, the following paragraph is added:
‘5.   Before 1 January 2020, the Commission shall present an updated analysis of the non-CO2 effects of aviation, accompanied, where appropriate, by a proposal on how best to address those effects.’;
(9)
in point (k) of Annex I, the year ‘2020’ is replaced by ‘2030’.
