Article 26
Authorisation for types of vehicles
1.   Member States may grant authorisations for types of vehicles.
2.   However, if Member States authorise a vehicle, they shall at the same time authorise the type of vehicle.
3.   A vehicle which conforms to a type already authorised in a Member State shall be authorised by that Member State on the basis of a declaration of conformity to this type submitted by the applicant without further checks. However, where the relevant provisions in TSIs and national rules on the basis of which a type of vehicle was authorised have changed, Member States shall decide if authorisations of type already granted remain valid or need to be renewed. The criteria which a national safety authority checks in the case of a renewed authorisation of type may only concern the changed rules. The renewal of the type authorisation does not affect authorisations of vehicles already granted on the basis of previously authorised types.
4.   The model of declaration of conformity to type shall be adopted by the Commission by 19 July 2009 on the basis of a draft prepared by the Agency and in accordance with the regulatory procedure referred to in Article 29(3).
5.   The declaration of conformity to type shall be established in accordance with:
(a)
for TSI conform vehicles, the verification procedures of the relevant TSIs;
(b)
for non-TSI conform vehicles, the verification procedures as defined in modules D or E of Decision 93/465/EEC. Where appropriate, the Commission may adopt an ad hoc verification procedure in accordance with the regulatory procedure referred to in Article 29(3).
6.   The applicant may request a type authorisation in several Member States at the same time. In this case, national safety authorities shall cooperate with a view to simplifying the procedure and minimising administrative efforts.
7.   Type authorisations shall be registered in the European register of authorised types of vehicles referred to in Article 34. This register shall specify the Member State or Member States in which a type of vehicle is authorised.
