Article 8
Extension of the scope of TSIs
1.   The Commission shall adopt, in accordance with the regulatory procedure referred to in Article 29(3), one or more mandates aiming at the development of new TSIs and/or the review of TSIs already adopted with a view to covering lines and vehicles not yet covered.
2.   The first such mandate shall indicate a first group of new TSIs and/or amendments to TSIs to be adopted by January 2012, without prejudice to Article 5(5) as regards the possibility of providing for specific cases and without prejudice to Article 9 allowing for derogations in particular circumstances. This first mandate shall be drawn up on the basis of a recommendation from the Agency with a view to determining new TSIs to be developed and/or existing TSIs to be amended in the light of the expected cost-effectiveness of each proposed measure and on the basis of the principle of proportionality of measures to be taken at Community level. To this end, appropriate consideration shall be given to Annex I, point 4 and the necessary balance between, on the one hand, the objectives of uninterrupted movement of trains and of technical harmonisation, and, on the other hand, the trans-European, national, regional or local level of traffic concerned.
3.   Until such time as the extension of the scope of the TSIs to cover the whole of the rail network takes effect:
(a)
authorisations for the placing in service
—
of vehicles and on-board control-command and signalling subsystems to be used at least partially on the part of the network that does not yet fall within the scope of the TSIs, in respect of that part of the network,
—
of infrastructure, energy and trackside control-command and signalling subsystems on the parts of the network that do not yet fall within the scope of the TSIs,
shall be granted in accordance with the national rules referred to in Article 8 of Directive 2004/49/EC, or, where applicable, Article 17(3) of this Directive;
(b)
authorisations for the placing in service of vehicles to be used occasionally on the part of the network that does not yet fall within the scope of the TSIs, in respect of that part of the network, shall be granted in accordance with Articles 21 to 27 and the national rules referred to in Article 8 of Directive 2004/49/EC, or, where applicable, Article 17(3) of this Directive.
4.   A Member State need not apply the new or revised TSIs adopted in accordance with paragraph 2 in the case of projects at an advanced stage of development or subject to a contract in the course of performance when the relevant group of TSIs is published.
