Article 28
Notified bodies
1.   Member States shall notify to the Commission and the other Member States the bodies responsible for carrying out the procedure for the assessment of conformity or suitability for use referred to in Article 13 and the verification procedure referred to in Article 18, indicating each body's area of responsibility, and the identification numbers obtained in advance from the Commission. The Commission shall publish in the Official Journal of the European Union the list of bodies, their identification numbers and areas of responsibility, and shall keep this list updated.
2.   Member States shall apply the criteria provided for in Annex VIII for the assessment of the bodies to be notified. Bodies meeting the assessment criteria provided for in the relevant European standards shall be deemed to meet those criteria.
3.   A Member State shall withdraw approval from a body which no longer meets the criteria referred to in Annex VIII. It shall forthwith inform the Commission and the other Member States thereof.
4.   Should a Member State or the Commission consider that a body notified by another Member State does not meet the criteria referred to in Annex VIII, the Commission shall consult the parties concerned. The Commission shall inform the latter Member State of any changes that are necessary for the notified body to retain the status conferred upon it.
5.   The Commission shall set up a notified bodies coordination group (hereinafter referred to as the Coordination Group) which shall discuss any matter relating to the application of the procedures for assessing conformity or suitability for the use referred to in Article 13 and the verification procedure referred to in Article 18, or to application of the relevant TSIs. Member States' representatives may take part in the work of the Coordination Group as observers.
The Commission and the observers shall inform the committee referred to in Article 29 of the work carried out in the framework of the Coordination Group. The Commission, when appropriate, will propose the measures needed to remedy the problems. Where necessary, coordination of the notified bodies shall be implemented in accordance with Article 30(4).
6.   The first of the reports referred to in Article 39 shall also assess the implementation of the criteria specified in Annex VIII, and, if necessary, propose appropriate measures.
