Article 9
Derogations
1.   In the absence of relevant specific cases, a Member State need not apply one or more TSIs in accordance with this Article in the following cases:
(a)
for a proposed new subsystem, for the renewal or upgrading of an existing subsystem, or for any element referred to in Article 1(1) at an advanced stage of development or the subject of a contract in the course of performance when these TSIs are published;
(b)
for any project concerning the renewal or upgrading of an existing subsystem where the loading gauge, track gauge, space between the tracks or electrification voltage in these TSIs is not compatible with those of the existing subsystem;
(c)
for a proposed new subsystem or for the proposed renewal or upgrading of an existing subsystem in the territory of that Member State when its rail network is separated or isolated by the sea or separated as a result of special geographical conditions from the rail network of the rest of the Community;
(d)
for any proposed renewal, extension or upgrading of an existing subsystem, when the application of these TSIs would compromise the economic viability of the project and/or the compatibility of the rail system in that Member State;
(e)
where, following an accident or a natural disaster, the conditions for the rapid restoration of the network do not economically or technically allow for partial or total application of the relevant TSIs;
(f)
for vehicles coming from or going to third countries the track gauge of which is different from that of the main rail network within the Community.
2.   In the cases referred to in paragraph 1, the Member State concerned shall communicate to the Commission a file containing the information set out in Annex IX. The Commission shall analyse the measures proposed by the Member State and shall inform the committee referred to in Article 29.
3.   In the case referred to in paragraph 1(a), within one year of entry into force of each TSI each Member State shall communicate to the Commission a list of projects that are taking place within its territory and are at an advanced stage of development.
4.   In the cases referred to in paragraph 1(a), (c) and (e), the Commission shall check that the file is in conformity and shall inform the Member State of the results of its analysis. Where necessary, a recommendation shall be drawn up concerning the specifications to be applied. The Member State may apply the alternative provisions referred to in Annex IX without delay.
5.   In the cases referred to in paragraph 1(b), (d) and (f), the Commission shall decide, in accordance with the regulatory procedure referred to in Article 29(3), whether to accept a request for a derogation. In the case referred to in paragraph 1(b), the Commission's decision shall not cover the loading gauge and the track gauge. The Commission shall give its decision within six months of the submission of the request supported by the complete file. In the absence of such a decision, the request shall be deemed to have been accepted. Pending the Commission's decision, in the case referred to in paragraph 1(f), a Member State may apply the alternative provisions referred to in Annex IX.
6.   All Member States shall be informed of the results of the analyses and of the outcome of the procedure set out in paragraphs 4 and 5.
