Article 6
Adoption, review and publication of TSIs
1.   Draft TSIs and subsequent draft amendments to TSIs shall be drafted by the Agency under a mandate from the Commission in accordance with the regulatory procedure referred to in Article 29(3) of this Directive. They shall be drafted in accordance with Articles 3 and 12 of Regulation (EC) No 881/2004 and in cooperation with the working parties mentioned in those Articles.
Measures designed to amend non-essential elements of this Directive by supplementing it with TSIs or amendments thereto shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 29(4).
On imperative grounds of urgency, the Commission may use the urgency procedure referred to in Article 29(5).
2.   The Agency shall be responsible for preparing the review and updating of TSIs and making any recommendations to the Commission in order to take account of developments in technology or social requirements. The Commission shall inform the committee referred to in Article 29 of such recommendations.
3.   Each draft TSI shall be drawn up in two stages.
Firstly, the Agency shall identify the basic parameters for the TSI as well as the interfaces with the other subsystems and any other specific cases that may be necessary. The most viable alternative solutions accompanied by technical and economic justification shall be put forward for each of these parameters and interfaces.
Secondly, the Agency shall draw up the draft TSI on the basis of these basic parameters. Where appropriate, the Agency shall take account of technical progress, of standardisation work already carried out, of working parties already in place and of acknowledged research work. An overall assessment of the estimated costs and benefits of the implementation of the TSIs shall be attached to the draft TSI; this assessment shall indicate the likely impact for all the operators and economic agents involved.
4.   The drafting, adoption and review of each TSI (including the basic parameters) shall take account of the estimated costs and benefits of all the technical solutions considered, together with the interfaces between them, so as to establish and implement the most viable solutions. The Member States shall participate in this assessment by providing the requisite data.
5.   The committee referred to in Article 29 shall be kept regularly informed of the preparatory work on the TSIs. During this work the Commission may, at the request of the committee, formulate any terms of reference or useful recommendations concerning the design of the TSIs and the cost-benefit analysis. In particular, the Commission may, at the request of a Member State, require that alternative solutions be examined and that the assessment of the cost and benefits of these alternative solutions be set out in the report annexed to the draft TSI.
6.   On the adoption of each TSI, the date of entry into force of that TSI shall be established in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 29(4). Where different subsystems have to be placed in service simultaneously for reasons of technical compatibility, the dates of entry into force of the corresponding TSIs shall be the same.
7.   The drafting, adoption and review of the TSIs shall take account of the opinion of users, as regards the characteristics which have a direct impact on the conditions in which they use the subsystems. To that end the Agency shall consult associations and bodies representing users during the drafting and review phases of the TSIs. It shall enclose with the draft TSI a report on the results of this consultation.
The list of associations and bodies to be consulted shall be drawn up by the Commission, after consulting the committee in accordance with the advisory procedure referred to in Article 29(2), and may be re-examined and updated at the request of a Member State or upon the initiative of the Commission.
8.   The drafting, adoption and review of the TSIs shall take account of the opinion of the social partners as regards the conditions referred to in Article 5(3)(g).
To this end, the social partners shall be consulted before the draft TSI is submitted, for adoption or review, to the committee referred to in Article 29.
The social partners shall be consulted in the context of the Sectoral Dialogue Committee set up in accordance with Commission Decision 98/500/EC of 20 May 1998 on the establishment of Sectoral Dialogue Committees promoting the Dialogue between the social partners at European level (18). The social partners shall issue their opinion within three months.
9.   When revision of a TSI leads to a change of requirements, the new TSI version shall ensure compatibility with subsystems placed in service in accordance with former TSI versions.
In case a new authorisation, renewal or upgrading of these subsystems is needed for duly justified safety or interoperability reasons, corresponding deadlines shall be fixed either in the TSI or, as appropriate, by the Member States.
10.   TSIs shall be published by the Commission in the Official Journal of the European Union.
