Article 6
Conditions relating to the requirement of good repute
1.   Subject to paragraph 2 of this Article, Member States shall determine the conditions to be met by undertakings and transport managers in order to satisfy the requirement of good repute laid down in Article 3(1)(b).
In determining whether an undertaking has satisfied that requirement, Member States shall consider the conduct of the undertaking, its transport managers and any other relevant person as may be determined by the Member State. Any reference in this Article to convictions, penalties or infringements shall include convictions, penalties or infringements of the undertaking itself, its transport managers and any other relevant person as may be determined by the Member State.
The conditions referred to in the first subparagraph shall include at least the following:
(a)
that there be no compelling grounds for doubting the good repute of the transport manager or the transport undertaking, such as convictions or penalties for any serious infringement of national rules in force in the fields of:
(i)
commercial law;
(ii)
insolvency law;
(iii)
pay and employment conditions in the profession;
(iv)
road traffic;
(v)
professional liability;
(vi)
trafficking in human beings or drugs; and
(b)
that the transport manager or the transport undertaking have not in one or more Member States been convicted of a serious criminal offence or incurred a penalty for a serious infringement of Community rules relating in particular to:
(i)
the driving time and rest periods of drivers, working time and the installation and use of recording equipment;
(ii)
the maximum weights and dimensions of commercial vehicles used in international traffic;
(iii)
the initial qualification and continuous training of drivers;
(iv)
the roadworthiness of commercial vehicles, including the compulsory technical inspection of motor vehicles;
(v)
access to the market in international road haulage or, as appropriate, access to the market in road passenger transport;
(vi)
safety in the carriage of dangerous goods by road;
(vii)
the installation and use of speed-limiting devices in certain categories of vehicle;
(viii)
driving licences;
(ix)
admission to the occupation;
(x)
animal transport.
2.   For the purposes of point (b) of the third subparagraph of paragraph 1:
(a)
where the transport manager or the transport undertaking has in one or more Member States been convicted of a serious criminal offence or incurred a penalty for one of the most serious infringements of Community rules as set out in Annex IV, the competent authority of the Member State of establishment shall carry out in an appropriate and timely manner a duly completed administrative procedure, which shall include, if appropriate, a check at the premises of the undertaking concerned.
The procedure shall determine whether, due to specific circumstances, the loss of good repute would constitute a disproportionate response in the individual case. Any such finding shall be duly reasoned and justified.
If the competent authority finds that the loss of good repute would constitute a disproportionate response, it may decide that good repute is unaffected. In such case, the reasons shall be recorded in the national register. The number of such decisions shall be indicated in the report referred to in Article 26(1).
If the competent authority does not find that the loss of good repute would constitute a disproportionate response, the conviction or penalty shall lead to the loss of good repute;
(b)
the Commission shall draw up a list of categories, types and degrees of seriousness of serious infringements of Community rules which, in addition to those set out in Annex IV, may lead to the loss of good repute. Member States shall take into account information on those infringements, including information received from other Member States, when setting the priorities for checks pursuant to Article 12(1).
Those measures, designed to amend non-essential elements of this Regulation by supplementing it and which relate to this list, shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 25(3).
To this end, the Commission shall:
(i)
lay down the categories and types of infringement which are most frequently encountered;
(ii)
define the degree of seriousness of infringements according to their potential to create a risk of fatalities or serious injuries; and
(iii)
provide the frequency of occurrence beyond which repeated infringements shall be regarded as more serious, by taking into account the number of drivers used for the transport activities managed by the transport manager.
3.   The requirement laid down in Article 3(1)(b) shall not be satisfied until a rehabilitation measure or any other measure having an equivalent effect has been taken pursuant to the relevant provisions of national law.
