Article 4
Transport manager
1.   An undertaking which engages in the occupation of road transport operator shall designate at least one natural person, the transport manager, who satisfies the requirements set out in Article 3(1)(b) and (d) and who:
(a)
effectively and continuously manages the transport activities of the undertaking;
(b)
has a genuine link to the undertaking, such as being an employee, director, owner or shareholder or administering it, or, if the undertaking is a natural person, is that person; and
(c)
is resident in the Community.
2.   If an undertaking does not satisfy the requirement of professional competence laid down in Article 3(1)(d), the competent authority may authorise it to engage in the occupation of road transport operator without a transport manager designated in accordance with paragraph 1 of this Article, provided that:
(a)
the undertaking designates a natural person residing in the Community who satisfies the requirements laid down in Article 3(1)(b) and (d), and who is entitled under contract to carry out duties as transport manager on behalf of the undertaking;
(b)
the contract linking the undertaking with the person referred to in point (a) specifies the tasks to be performed on an effective and continuous basis by that person, and indicates his or her responsibilities as transport manager. The tasks to be specified shall comprise, in particular, those relating to vehicle maintenance management, verification of transport contracts and documents, basic accounting, the assignment of loads or services to drivers and vehicles, and the verification of safety procedures;
(c)
in his or her capacity as transport manager, the person referred to in point (a) may manage the transport activities of up to four different undertakings carried out with a combined maximum total fleet of 50 vehicles. Member States may decide to lower the number of undertakings and/or the size of the total fleet of vehicles which that person may manage; and
(d)
the person referred to in point (a) performs the specified tasks solely in the interests of the undertaking and his or her responsibilities are exercised independently of any undertakings for which the undertaking carries out transport operations.
3.   Member States may decide that a transport manager designated in accordance with paragraph 1 may not in addition be designated in accordance with paragraph 2, or may only be so designated in respect of a limited number of undertakings or a fleet of vehicles that is smaller than that referred to in paragraph 2(c).
4.   The undertaking shall notify the competent authority of the transport manager or managers designated.
