Article 19
Certificates of good repute and equivalent documents
1.   Without prejudice to Article 11(4), the Member State of establishment shall accept as sufficient proof of good repute for admission to the occupation of road transport operator the production of an extract from a judicial record or, failing that, an equivalent document issued by a competent judicial or administrative authority in the Member State where the transport manager or any other relevant person used to reside.
2.   Where a Member State imposes on its own nationals certain conditions relating to good repute, and proof that these conditions are met cannot be provided by means of the document referred to in paragraph 1, that Member State shall accept as sufficient proof for nationals of other Member States a certificate issued by a competent judicial or administrative authority in the Member State(s) where the transport manager or any other relevant person used to reside stating that these conditions have been met. Such certificate shall relate to the specific information taken into consideration in the Member State of establishment.
3.   If the document referred to in paragraph 1 or the certificate referred to in paragraph 2 has not been issued by the Member State(s) where the transport manager or any other relevant person used to reside, that document or certificate may be replaced by a declaration on oath or by a solemn declaration made by the transport manager or any other relevant person before a competent judicial or administrative authority or, where appropriate, before a notary in the Member State where the transport manager or any other relevant person used to reside. Such authority or notary shall issue a certificate authenticating the declaration on oath or the solemn declaration.
4.   A document referred to in paragraph 1 and a certificate referred to in paragraph 2 shall not be accepted if produced more than 3 months after their date of issue. This condition shall also apply to a declaration made in accordance with paragraph 3.
