Article 8
Conditions relating to the requirement of professional competence
1.   In order to satisfy the requirement laid down in Article 3(1)(d), the person or persons concerned shall possess knowledge corresponding to the level provided for in Part I of Annex I in the subjects listed therein. That knowledge shall be demonstrated by means of a compulsory written examination which, if a Member State so decides, may be supplemented by an oral examination. Those examinations shall be organised in accordance with Part II of Annex I. To this end, Member States may decide to impose training prior to the examination.
2.   The persons concerned shall sit the examination in the Member State in which they have their normal residence or the Member State in which they work.

                     ‘Normal residence’ shall mean the place where a person usually lives, that is for at least 185 days in each calendar year, because of personal ties which show close links between that person and the place where he is living.
However, the normal residence of a person whose occupational ties are in a different place from his personal ties and who, consequently, lives in turn in different places situated in two or more Member States, shall be regarded as being in the place of his personal ties, provided that such person returns there regularly. This last condition shall not be required where the person is living in a Member State in order to carry out a task of a definite duration. Attendance at a university or school shall not imply transfer of normal residence.
3.   Only the authorities or bodies duly authorised for this purpose by a Member State, in accordance with criteria defined by it, may organise and certify the written and oral examinations referred to in paragraph 1. Member States shall regularly verify that the conditions under which those authorities or bodies organise the examinations are in accordance with Annex I.
4.   Member States may duly authorise, in accordance with criteria defined by them, bodies to provide applicants with high-quality training to prepare them for the examinations and transport managers with continuous training to update their knowledge if they wish to do so. Such Member States shall regularly verify that these bodies at all times fulfil the criteria on the basis of which they were authorised.
5.   Member States may promote periodic training on the subjects listed in Annex I at 10-year intervals to ensure that transport managers are aware of developments in the sector.
6.   Member States may require persons who possess a certificate of professional competence, but who have not managed a road haulage undertaking or a road passenger transport undertaking in the last 5 years, to undertake retraining in order to update their knowledge regarding the current developments of the legislation referred to in Part I of Annex I.
7.   A Member State may exempt the holders of certain higher education qualifications or technical education qualifications issued in that Member State, specifically designated to this end and entailing knowledge of all the subjects listed in Annex I from the examination in the subjects covered by those qualifications. The exemption shall only apply to those sections of Part I of Annex I for which the qualification covers all subjects listed under the heading of each section.
A Member State may exempt from specified parts of the examinations holders of certificates of professional competence valid for national transport operations in that Member State.
8.   A certificate issued by the authority or body referred to in paragraph 3 shall be produced as proof of professional competence. That certificate shall not be transferable to any other person. It shall be drawn up in accordance with the security features and the model certificate set out in Annexes II and III and shall bear the seal of the duly authorised authority or body which issued it.
9.   The Commission shall adapt Annexes I, II and III to technical progress. Those measures, designed to amend non-essential elements of this Regulation, shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 25(3).
10.   The Commission shall encourage and facilitate the exchange of experience and information between Member States, or through any body it may designate, concerning training, examinations and authorisations.
