Article 15
Dynamic purchasing systems
1. Member States may provide that contracting entities may use dynamic purchasing systems.
2. In order to set up a dynamic purchasing system, contracting entities shall follow the rules of the open procedure in all its phases up to the award of the contracts to be concluded under this system. All tenderers who satisfy the selection criteria and have submitted an indicative tender which complies with the specification and any possible additional documents shall be admitted to the system; indicative tenders may be improved at any time provided that they continue to comply with the specification. With a view to setting up the system and to the award of contracts under that system, contracting entities shall use solely electronic means in accordance with Article 48(2) to (5).
3. For the purposes of setting up the dynamic purchasing system, contracting entities shall:
(a) publish a contract notice making it clear that a dynamic purchasing system is involved;
(b) indicate in the specification, amongst other matters, the nature of the purchases envisaged under that system, as well as all the necessary information concerning the purchasing system, the electronic equipment used and the technical connection arrangements and specifications;
(c) offer by electronic means, on publication of the notice and until the system expires, unrestricted, direct and full access to the specification and to any additional documents and shall indicate in the notice the internet address at which such documents may be consulted.
4. Contracting entities shall give any economic operator, throughout the entire period of the dynamic purchasing system, the possibility of submitting an indicative tender and of being admitted to the system under the conditions referred to in paragraph 2. They shall complete evaluation within a maximum of 15 days from the date of submission of the indicative tender. However, they may extend the evaluation period provided that no invitation to tender is issued in the meantime.
Contracting entities shall inform the tenderer referred to in the first subparagraph at the earliest possible opportunity of its admittance to the dynamic purchasing system or of the rejection of its indicative tender.
5. Each specific contract shall be the subject of an invitation to tender. Before issuing the invitation to tender, contracting entities shall publish a simplified contract notice inviting all interested economic operators to submit an indicative tender, in accordance with paragraph 4, within a time limit that may not be less than 15 days from the date on which the simplified notice was sent. Contracting entities may not proceed with tendering until they have completed evaluation of all the indicative tenders received within that time limit.
6. Contracting entities shall invite all tenderers admitted to the system to submit a tender for each specific contract to be awarded under the system. To that end, they shall set a time limit for the submission of tenders.
They shall award the contract to the tenderer which submitted the best tender on the basis of the award criteria set out in the contract notice for the establishment of the dynamic purchasing system. Those criteria may, if appropriate, be formulated more precisely in the invitation referred to in the first subparagraph.
7. A dynamic purchasing system may not last for more than four years, except in duly justified exceptional cases.
Contracting entities may not resort to this system to prevent, restrict or distort competition.
No charges may be billed to the interested economic operators or to parties to the system.

