Article 45
Time limits for the receipt of requests to participate and for the receipt of tenders
1. When fixing the time limits for requests to participate and the receipt of tenders, contracting entities shall take particular account of the complexity of the contract and the time required for drawing up tenders, without prejudice to the minimum time limits set by this Article.
2. In the case of open procedures, the minimum time limit for the receipt of tenders shall be 52 days from the date on which the contract notice was sent.
3. In restricted procedures and in negotiated procedures with a prior call for competition, the following arrangements shall apply:
(a) the time limit for the receipt of requests to participate, in response to a notice published under Article 42(1)(c), or in response to an invitation by the contracting entities under Article 47(5), shall, as a general rule, be fixed at no less than 37 days from the date on which the notice or invitation was sent and may in no case be less than 22 days if the notice is sent for publication by means other than electronic means or fax, and at no less than 15 days if the notice is transmitted by such means;
(b) the time limit for the receipt of tenders may be set by mutual agreement between the contracting entity and the selected candidates, provided that all candidates have the same time to prepare and submit their tenders;
(c) where it is not possible to reach agreement on the time limit for the receipt of tenders, the contracting entity shall fix a time limit which shall, as a general rule, be at least 24 days and shall in no case be less than 10 days from the date of the invitation to tender.
4. If the contracting entities have published a periodic indicative notice as referred to in Article 41(1) in accordance with Annex XX, the minimum time limit for the receipt of tenders in open procedures shall, as a general rule, not be less than 36 days, but shall in no case be less than 22 days from the date on which the notice was sent.
These reduced time limits are permitted, provided that the periodic indicative notice has included, in addition to the information required by Annex XV A, part I, all the information required by Annex XV A, part II, insofar as the latter information is available at the time the notice is published, and that the notice has been sent for publication between 52 days and 12 months before the date on which the contract notice referred to in Article 42(1)(c) is sent.
5. Where notices are drawn up and transmitted by electronic means in accordance with the format and procedures for transmission indicated in point 3 of Annex XX the time-limits for the receipt of requests to participate in restricted and negotiated procedures, and for receipt of tenders in open procedures, may be reduced by seven days.
6. Except in the case of a time limit set by mutual agreement in accordance with paragraph 3(b), time limits for the receipt of tenders in open, restricted and negotiated procedures may be further reduced by five days where the contracting entity offers unrestricted and full direct access to the contract documents and any supplementary documents by electronic means from the date on which the notice used as a means of calling for competition is published, in accordance with Annex XX. The notice should specify the internet address at which this documentation is accessible.
7. In open procedures, the cumulative effect of the reductions provided for in paragraphs 4, 5 and 6 may in no case result in a time limit for the receipt of tenders of less than 15 days from the date on which the contract notice is sent.
However, if the contract notice is not transmitted by fax or electronic means, the cumulative effect of the reductions provided for in paragraphs 4, 5 and 6 may in no case result in a time limit for receipt of tenders in an open procedure of less than 22 days from the date on which the contract notice is transmitted.
8. The cumulative effect of the reductions provided for in paragraphs 4, 5 and 6 may in no case result in a time limit for receipt of requests to participate, in response to a notice published under Article 42(1)(c), or in response to an invitation by the contracting entities under Article 47(5), of less than 15 days from the date on which the contract notice or invitation is sent.
In restricted and negotiated procedures, the cumulative effect of the reductions provided for in paragraphs 4, 5 and 6 may in no case, except that of a time limit set by mutual agreement in accordance with paragraph 3(b), result in a time limit for the receipt of tenders of less than 10 days from the date of the invitation to tender.
9. If, for whatever reason, the contract documents and the supporting documents or additional information, although requested in good time, have not been supplied within the time limits set in Articles 46 and 47, or where tenders can be made only after a visit to the site or after on-the-spot inspection of the documents supporting the contract documents, the time limits for the receipt of tenders shall be extended accordingly, except in the case of a time-limit set by mutual agreement in accordance with paragraph 3(b), so that all economic operators concerned may be aware of all the information needed for the preparation of a tender.
10. A summary table of the time limits laid down in this Article is given in Annex XXII.

