Article 58
Tenders comprising products originating in third countries
1. This Article shall apply to tenders covering products originating in third countries with which the Community has not concluded, whether multilaterally or bilaterally, an agreement ensuring comparable and effective access for Community undertakings to the markets of those third countries. It shall be without prejudice to the obligations of the Community or its Member States in respect of third countries.
2. Any tender submitted for the award of a supply contract may be rejected where the proportion of the products originating in third countries, as determined in accordance with Council Regulation (EEC) No 2913/92 of 12 October 1992 establishing the Community Customs Code(30), exceeds 50 % of the total value of the products constituting the tender. For the purposes of this Article, software used in telecommunications network equipment shall be regarded as products.
3. Subject to the second subparagraph, where two or more tenders are equivalent in the light of the contract award criteria defined in Article 55, preference shall be given to those tenders which may not be rejected pursuant to paragraph 2. The prices of those tenders shall be considered equivalent for the purposes of this Article, if the price difference does not exceed 3 %.
However, a tender shall not be preferred to another pursuant to the first subparagraph where its acceptance would oblige the contracting entity to acquire equipment having technical characteristics different from those of existing equipment, resulting in incompatibility, technical difficulties in operation and maintenance, or disproportionate costs.
4. For the purposes of this Article, those third countries to which the benefit of the provisions of this Directive has been extended by a Council Decision in accordance with paragraph 1 shall not be taken into account for determining the proportion, referred to in paragraph 2, of products originating in third countries.
5. The Commission shall submit an annual report to the Council, commencing in the second half of the first year following the entry into force of this Directive, on progress made in multilateral or bilateral negotiations regarding access for Community undertakings to the markets of third countries in the fields covered by this Directive, on any result which such negotiations may have achieved, and on the implementation in practice of all the agreements which have been concluded.
The Council, acting by a qualified majority on a proposal from the Commission, may amend the provisions of this Article in the light of such developments.

