Article 43
Contract award notices
1. Contracting entities which have awarded a contract or a framework agreement shall, within two months of the award of the contract or framework agreement, send a contract award notice as referred to in Annex XVI under conditions to be laid down by the Commission in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 68(2).
In the case of contracts awarded under a framework agreement within the meaning of Article 14(2), the contracting entities shall not be bound to send a notice of the results of the award procedure for each contract based on that agreement.
Contracting entities shall send a contract award notice based on a dynamic purchasing system within two months after the award of each contract. They may, however, group such notices on a quarterly basis. In that case, they shall send the grouped notices within two months of the end of each quarter.
2. The information provided in accordance with Annex XVI and intended for publication shall be published in accordance with Annex XX. In this connection, the Commission shall respect any sensitive commercial aspects which the contracting entities may point out when forwarding this information, concerning the number of tenders received, the identity of economic operators, or prices.
3. Where contracting entities award a research-and-development service contract ("R& D contract") by way of a procedure without a call for competition in accordance with Article 40(3)(b), they may limit to the reference "research and development services" the information to be provided in accordance with Annex XVI concerning the nature and quantity of the services provided.
Where contracting entities award an R& D contract which cannot be awarded by way of a procedure without a call for competition in accordance with Article 40(3)(b), they may, on grounds of commercial confidentiality, limit the information to be provided in accordance with Annex XVI concerning the nature and quantity of the services supplied.
In such cases, contracting entities shall ensure that any information published under this paragraph is no less detailed than that contained in the notice of the call for competition published in accordance with Article 42(1).
If they use a qualification system, contracting entities shall ensure in such cases that such information is no less detailed than the category referred to in the list of qualified service providers drawn up in accordance with Article 53(7).
4. In the case of contracts awarded for services listed in Annex XVII B, the contracting entities shall indicate in the notice whether they agree to publication.
5. Information provided in accordance with Annex XVI and marked as not being intended for publication shall be published only in simplified form and in accordance with Annex XX for statistical purposes.

