Article 52
Mutual recognition concerning administrative, technical or financial conditions, and certificates, tests and evidence
1. When selecting participants for a restricted or negotiated procedure, in reaching their decision as to qualification or when the criteria and rules are being updated, contracting entities shall not:
(a) impose administrative, technical or financial conditions on certain economic operators which would not be imposed on others;
(b) require tests or evidence which would duplicate objective evidence already available.
2. Where they request the production of certificates drawn up by independent bodies attesting the compliance of the economic operator with certain quality assurance standards, contracting entities shall refer to quality assurance systems based on the relevant European standards series certified by bodies conforming to the European standards series concerning certification.
Contracting entities shall recognise equivalent certificates from bodies established in other Member States. They shall also accept other evidence of equivalent quality assurance measures from economic operators.
3. For works and service contracts, and only in appropriate cases, the contracting entities may require, in order to verify the economic operator's technical abilities, an indication of the environmental management measures which the economic operator will be able to apply when carrying out the contract. In such cases, should the contracting entities require the production of certificates drawn up by independent bodies attesting the compliance of the economic operator with certain environmental management standards, they shall refer to the EMAS or to environmental management standards based on the relevant European or international standards certified by bodies conforming to Community law or the relevant European or international standards concerning certification.
Contracting entities shall recognise equivalent certificates from bodies established in other Member States. They shall also accept other evidence of equivalent environmental management measures from economic operators.

