Article 41
Periodic indicative notices and notices on the existence of a system of qualification
1. Contracting entities shall make known, at least once a year, by means of a periodic indicative notice as referred to in Annex XV A, published by the Commission or by themselves on their "buyer profile", as described in point 2(b) of Annex XX:
(a) where supplies are concerned, the estimated total value of the contracts or the framework agreements by product area which they intend to award over the following 12 months, where the total estimated value, taking into account the provisions of Articles 16 and 17, is equal to or greater than EUR 750000.
The product area shall be established by the contracting entities by reference to the CPV nomenclature:
(b) where services are concerned, the estimated total value of the contracts or the framework agreements in each of the categories of services listed in Annex XVII A which they intend to award over the following 12 months, where such estimated total value, taking into account the provisions of Articles 16 and 17, is equal to or greater than EUR 750000;
(c) where works are concerned, the essential characteristics of the works contracts or the framework agreements which they intend to award over the following 12 months, whose estimated value is equal to or greater than the threshold specified in Article 16, taking into account the provisions of Article 17.
The notices referred to in subparagraphs (a) and (b) shall be sent to the Commission or published on the buyer profile as soon as possible after the beginning of the budgetary year.
The notice referred to in subparagraph (c) shall be sent to the Commission or published on the buyer profile as soon as possible after the decision approving the planning of the works contracts or the framework agreements that the contracting entities intend to award.
Contracting entities which publish a periodic indicative notice on their buyer profiles shall transmit to the Commission, electronically, a notice of the publication of the periodic indicative notice on a buyer profile, in accordance with the format and procedures for the electronic transmission of notices indicated in point 3 of Annex XX.
The publication of the notices referred to in subparagraphs (a), (b) and (c) shall be compulsory only where the contracting entities take the option of reducing the time limits for the receipt of tenders as laid down in Article 45(4).
This paragraph shall not apply to procedures without prior call for competition.
2. Contracting entities may, in particular, publish or arrange for the Commission to publish periodic indicative notices relating to major projects without repeating information previously included in a periodic indicative notice, provided that it is clearly pointed out that these notices are additional ones.
3. Where contracting entities choose to set up a qualification system in accordance with Article 53, the system shall be the subject of a notice as referred to in Annex XIV, indicating the purpose of the qualification system and how to have access to the rules concerning its operation. Where the system is of a duration greater than three years, the notice shall be published annually. Where the system is of a shorter duration, an initial notice shall suffice.

