Article 44
Form and manner of publication of notices
1. Notices shall include the information mentioned in Annexes XIII, XIV, XV A, XV B and XVI and, where appropriate, any other information deemed useful by the contracting entity in the format of standard forms adopted by the Commission in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 68(2).
2. Notices sent by contracting entities to the Commission shall be sent either by electronic means in accordance with the format and procedures for transmission indicated in point 3 of Annex XX, or by other means.
The notices referred to in Articles 41, 42 and 43 shall be published in accordance with the technical characteristics for publication set out in point 1(a) and (b) of Annex XX.
3. Notices drawn up and transmitted by electronic means in accordance with the format and procedures for transmission indicated in point 3 of Annex XX, shall be published no later than five days after they are sent.
Notices which are not transmitted by electronic means in accordance with the format and procedures for transmission indicated in point 3 of Annex XX shall be published not later than 12 days after they are transmitted. However, in exceptional cases, the contract notices referred to in Article 42(1)(c) shall be published within five days in response to a request by the contracting entity, provided that the notice has been sent by fax.
4. Contract notices shall be published in full in an official language of the Community as chosen by the contracting entity, this original language version constituting the sole authentic text. A summary of the important elements of each notice shall be published in the other official languages.
The costs of publication of notices by the Commission shall be borne by the Community.
5. Notices and their contents may not be published at national level before the date on which they are sent to the Commission.
Notices published at national level shall not contain information other than that contained in the notices dispatched to the Commission or published on a buyer profile in accordance with the first subparagraph of Article 41(1), but shall mention the date of dispatch of the notice to the Commission or its publication on the buyer profile.
Periodic indicative notices may not be published on a buyer profile before the dispatch to the Commission of the notice of their publication in that form; they shall mention the date of that dispatch.
6. Contracting entities shall ensure that they are able to supply proof of the dates on which notices are dispatched.
7. The Commission shall give the contracting entity confirmation of the publication of the information sent, mentioning the date of that publication. Such confirmation shall constitute proof of publication.
8. Contracting entities may publish in accordance with paragraphs 1 to 7 contract notices which are not subject to the publication requirements laid down in this Directive.

