Article 9
Excess emissions premium
1.   In respect of the period from 1 January to 31 December 2014 and every calendar year thereafter, the Commission shall impose an excess emissions premium on a manufacturer or pool manager, as appropriate, where a manufacturer's average specific emissions of CO2 exceed its specific emissions target.
2.   The excess emissions premium under paragraph 1 shall be calculated using the following formulae:
(a)
from 2014 until 2018:
(i)
for excess emissions of more than 3 g CO2/km:
((Excess emissions – 3 g CO2/km) × EUR 95 + EUR 45) × number of new light commercial vehicles;
(ii)
for excess emissions of more than 2 g CO2/km but no more than 3 g CO2/km:
((Excess emissions – 2 g CO2/km) × EUR 25 + EUR 20) × number of new light commercial vehicles;
(iii)
for excess emissions of more than 1 g CO2/km but no more than 2 g CO2/km:
((Excess emissions – 1 g CO2/km) × EUR 15 + EUR 5) × number of new light commercial vehicles;
(iv)
for excess emissions of no more than 1 g CO2/km:
(Excess emissions × EUR 5) × number of new light commercial vehicles;
(b)
from 2019:
(Excess emissions × EUR 95) × number of new light commercial vehicles.
For the purposes of this Article the following definitions shall apply:
—

                        ‘excess emissions’ means the positive number of grams per kilometre by which a manufacturer's average specific emissions of CO2, taking into account CO2 emissions reductions due to innovative technologies approved in accordance with Article 12, exceeded its specific emissions target in the calendar year or part thereof to which the obligation under Article 4 applies, rounded to the nearest three decimal places, and
—

                        ‘number of new light commercial vehicles’ means the number of new light commercial vehicles of which it is the manufacturer and which were registered in that period according to the phase-in criteria as set out in Article 4.
3.   The Commission shall adopt detailed arrangements for the collection of excess emissions premiums under paragraph 1 of this Article. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 14(2).
4.   The amounts of the excess emissions premium shall be considered as revenue for the general budget of the European Union.
