Article 6
Limitations on the number of providers of port services
1.   The managing body of the port, or the competent authority, may limit the number of providers of port services for a given port service for one or more of the following reasons:
(a)
the scarcity or reserved use of land or waterside space, provided that the limitation is in accordance with the decisions or plans agreed by the managing body of the port and, where appropriate, any other public authorities competent in accordance with the national law;
(b)
the absence of such a limitation is obstructing the performance of public service obligations as provided for in Article 7, including when such absence leads to excessively high costs related to the performance of such obligations for the managing body of the port, the competent authority, or the port users;
(c)
the absence of such a limitation runs counter to the need to ensure safe, secure or environmentally sustainable port operations;
(d)
the characteristics of the port infrastructure or the nature of the port traffic are such that the operations of multiple providers of port services in the port would not be possible;
(e)
where it has been established pursuant to Article 35 of Directive 2014/25/EU that a port sector or subsector, together with its port services, within a Member State carries out an activity that is directly exposed to competition in accordance with Article 34 of that Directive. In such cases, paragraphs 2 and 3 of this Article shall not apply.
2.   In order to give interested parties the opportunity to submit comments within a reasonable period, the managing body of the port, or the competent authority, shall publish any proposal to limit the number of providers of port services in accordance with paragraph 1 together with the grounds justifying it at least three months in advance of the adoption of the decision to limit the number of providers of port services.
3.   The managing body of the port, or the competent authority, shall publish the adopted decision to limit the number of providers of port services.
4.   Where the managing body of the port, or the competent authority, decides to limit the number of providers of a port service, it shall follow a selection procedure which shall be open to all interested parties, non-discriminatory and transparent. The managing body of the port, or the competent authority, shall publish information on the port service to be provided and on the selection procedure, and shall ensure that all essential information that is necessary for the preparation of their applications is effectively accessible to all interested parties. Interested parties shall be given long enough to allow them to make a meaningful assessment and prepare their applications. In normal circumstances, the minimum such period shall be 30 days.
5.   Paragraph 4 shall not apply in the cases referred to in point (e) of paragraph 1 and in paragraph 7 of this Article and in Article 8.
6.   Where the managing body of a port, or the competent authority, provides port services either itself or through a legally distinct entity which it directly or indirectly controls, the Member State concerned shall take such measures as are necessary to avoid conflicts of interests. In the absence of such measures, the number of providers shall not be fewer than two, unless one or more of the reasons listed in paragraph 1 justifies a limitation on the number of providers of port services to a single provider.
7.   Member States may decide that their ports of the comprehensive network which do not meet the criteria in point (b) of Article 20(2) of Regulation (EU) No 1315/2013 may limit the number of service providers for a given port service. Member States shall inform the Commission of such a decision.
