Article 46
Commission powers
1.   In order to take account of revenue collected by paying agencies for the Union's budget when making payments on the basis of the expenditure declarations submitted by Member States, the Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 115 concerning the conditions under which certain types of expenditure and revenue under the Funds are to be compensated.
2.   In order to enable the equitable distribution of the appropriations available between the Member States, if the Union's budget has not been adopted by the beginning of the financial year or if the total amount of the commitments scheduled exceeds the threshold laid down in Article 170(3) of Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012, the Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 115 of this Regulation concerning the method applicable to the commitments and the payment of the amounts.
3.   In order to verify the consistency of the data notified by the Member States in relation to the expenditure or other information provided for in this Regulation, the Commission shall be empowered, in the case of non-compliance with the obligation to notify the Commission pursuant to Article 102, to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 115 on the deferral of monthly payments to Member States referred to in Article 42 with regard to expenditure under the EAGF and laying down the conditions under which it will reduce or suspend interim payments to Member States under the EAFRD referred to in that Article.
4.   When applying Article 42 in order to ensure that principle of proportionality is respected, the Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 115 pertaining to rules on:
(a)
the list of measures which fall under Article 42;
(b)
the rate of suspension of payments referred to in that Article.
5.   The Commission may adopt implementing acts laying down further rules on the obligation laid down in Article 44 as well as the specific conditions applying to the information to be booked in the accounts kept by the paying agencies. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 116(3).
6.   The Commission may adopt implementing acts laying down rules on:
(a)
the financing and accounting of intervention measures in the form of public storage, and other expenditure financed by the Funds;
(b)
the terms and conditions governing the implementation of the automatic decommitment procedure;
(c)
the procedure and other practical arrangements for the proper functioning of the mechanism provided for in Article 42.
Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 116(3).

Section I



General provisions


