Article 41
Reduction and suspension of monthly and interim payments
1.   Where the declarations of expenditure or the information referred to in Article 102 enable the Commission to establish that expenditure has been effected by bodies which are not accredited paying agencies, that payment periods or financial ceilings set by Union law have not been respected or that expenditure has otherwise not been effected in accordance with Union rules, the Commission may reduce or suspend the monthly or interim payments to the Member State concerned in the framework of the implementing acts concerning the monthly payments referred to in Article 18(3) or in the framework of the interim payments referred to in Article 36, after giving the Member State an opportunity to submit its comments.
Where the declarations of expenditure or the information referred to in Article 102 do not enable the Commission to establish that the expenditure has been effected in accordance with Union rules, the Commission shall ask the Member State concerned to supply further information and to submit comments within a period which shall not be less than 30 days. If the Member State fails to respond to the Commission request within the period set or if the response is considered unsatisfactory or demonstrates that the expenditure has not been effected in accordance with Union rules, the Commission may reduce or suspend the monthly or interim payments to the Member State concerned in the framework of the implementing acts concerning the monthly payments referred to in Article 18(3) or in the framework of the interim payments referred to in Article 36.
2.   The Commission may adopt implementing acts, reducing or suspending the monthly or interim payments to a Member State if one or more of the key components of the national control system in question do not exist or are not effective due to the gravity or persistence of the deficiencies found, or if there are similar serious deficiencies in the system for the recovery of irregular payments and if one of the following conditions is met:
(a)
the deficiencies referred to in the first subparagraph are of a continuous nature and have been the reason for at least two implementing acts pursuant to Article 52, excluding from Union financing expenditure from the Member State concerned; or
(b)
the Commission concludes that the Member State concerned is not in a position to implement in the immediate future the necessary remedial measures in accordance with an action plan with clear progress indicators, to be established in consultation with the Commission.
The reduction or suspension shall be applied to the relevant expenditure effected by the paying agency where the deficiencies exist for a period to be determined in the implementing acts referred to in this paragraph, which shall not exceed twelve months. If the conditions for the reduction or suspension continue to be met, the Commission may adopt implementing acts prolonging that period for further periods not exceeding twelve months in total. The reduction and suspension shall not be continued if those conditions are no longer met.
The implementing acts provided for in this paragraph shall be adopted in accordance with the advisory procedure referred to in Article 116(2).
Before adopting the implementing acts referred to in this paragraph, the Commission shall inform the Member State concerned of its intention and shall ask it to react within a period which shall not be less than 30 days.
The implementing acts determining the monthly payments referred to in Article 18(3) or the interim payments referred to in Article 36 shall take account of the implementing acts adopted under this paragraph.
3.   Reductions and suspensions under this Article shall be applied in accordance with the principle of proportionality and shall be without prejudice to the application of Articles 51 and 52.
4.   Reductions and suspensions under this Article shall be without prejudice to Articles 19, 22 and 23 of Regulation (EU) No 1303/2013.
The suspensions referred to in Articles 19 and 22 of Regulation (EU) No 1303/2013 shall be in accordance with the procedure laid down in paragraph 2 of this Article.
