Article 106
Exchange rate and operative event
1.   The prices and amounts referred to in Article 105(2) shall be converted in the Member States which have not adopted the euro into the national currency by means of an exchange rate.
2.   The operative event for the exchange rate shall be:
(a)
the completion of customs import or export formalities in the case of amounts collected or granted in trade with third countries;
(b)
the event whereby the economic objective of the operation is attained in all other cases.
3.   Where a direct payment as provided for in Regulation (EU) No 1307/2013 is made to a beneficiary in a currency other than the euro, Member States shall convert the amount of aid expressed in euro into the national currency on the basis of the most recent exchange rate set by the European Central Bank prior to 1 October of the year for which the aid is granted.
By way of derogation from the first subparagraph, Member States may decide, in duly justified cases, to carry out the conversion on the basis of the average of the exchange rates set by the European Central Bank during the month prior to 1 October of the year for which the aid is granted. Member States that choose that option shall set and publish that average rate before 1 December of that year.
4.   As regards EAGF, when drawing up their declarations of expenditure, Member States which have not adopted the euro shall apply the same exchange rate as that which they used to make payments to beneficiaries or receive revenue, in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.
5.   In order to specify the operative event referred to in paragraph 2 or to fix it for reasons peculiar to the market organisation or the amount in question, the Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 115, containing rules on those operative events and the exchange rate to be used. The specific operative event shall be determined taking account of the following criteria:
(a)
actual applicability as soon as possible of adjustments to the exchange rate;
(b)
similarity of the operative events for analogous operations carried out under the market organisation;
(c)
coherence in the operative events for the various prices and amounts relating to the market organisation;
(d)
practicability and effectiveness of checks on the application of suitable exchange rates.
6.   In order to avoid the application by the Member States which have not adopted the euro of different exchange rates in accounts of revenue received or aid paid to beneficiaries in a currency other than the euro, on the one hand, and in the establishment of the declaration of expenditure drawn up by the paying agency, on the other, the Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 115 laying down rules on the exchange rate applicable when declarations of expenditure are drawn up and when public storage operations are recorded in the accounts of the paying agency.
