Article 36
Interim payments
1.   Interim payments shall be made for each rural development programme. They shall be calculated by applying the co-financing rate for each measure to the public expenditure effected pertaining to it as referred to in Article 59 of Regulation (EU) No 1305/2013.
2.   Subject to the availability of resources, the Commission shall, taking account of reductions or suspensions applied under Article 41, make interim payments in order to reimburse the expenditure effected by accredited paying agencies in implementing the programmes.
3.   Each interim payment shall be made by the Commission, subject to compliance with the following requirements:
(a)
transmission to the Commission of a declaration of expenditure signed by the accredited paying agency, in accordance with Article 102(1)(c);
(b)
no overrun of the total EAFRD contribution to each measure for the entire period covered by the programme concerned;
(c)
transmission to the Commission of the last annual progress report on the implementation of the rural development programme.
4.   If one of the requirements laid down in paragraph 3 is not met, the Commission shall forthwith inform the accredited paying agency or the coordinating body, where one has been appointed. If one of the requirements laid down in point (a) or in point (c) of paragraph 3 is not respected, the declaration of expenditure shall be inadmissible.
5.   Without prejudice to the application of Articles 51 and 52, the Commission shall make interim payments within 45 days of registering a declaration of expenditure which meets the requirements set out in paragraph 3 of this Article.
6.   Accredited paying agencies shall establish and forward to the Commission, either directly or via the intermediary of the coordinating body, where one has been appointed, intermediate declarations of expenditure relating to rural development programmes, within periods to be set by the Commission.
The Commission shall adopt implementing acts laying down the periods for accredited paying agencies to forward those intermediate declarations of expenditure. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 116(3).
Declarations of expenditure shall cover expenditure that the paying agencies have effected during each of the periods concerned. However, in cases in which expenditure referred to in Article 65(9) of Regulation (EU) No 1303/2013 cannot be declared to the Commission in the period concerned due to pending approval by the Commission of an amendment to the programme, it may be declared in subsequent periods.
Intermediate declarations of expenditure in respect of expenditure effected from 16 October onwards shall be booked to the following year's budget.
7.   Article 83 of Regulation (EU) No 1303/2013 shall apply.
