Article 72
Aid applications and payment claims
1.   Each year, a beneficiary of the support referred to in Article 67(2) shall submit an application for direct payments or a payment claim for the relevant area and animal-related rural development measures respectively indicating, where applicable:
(a)
all the agricultural parcels on the holding, as well as the non-agricultural area for which support referred to in Article 67(2) is claimed;
(b)
the payment entitlements declared for activation;
(c)
any other information provided for in this Regulation or required with a view to the implementation of the relevant sectoral agricultural legislation or by the Member State concerned.
As regards the area-related direct payment, each Member State shall determine the minimum size of agricultural parcels in respect of which an application may be made. However, the minimum size shall not exceed 0,3 ha.
2.   By way of derogation from point (a) of paragraph 1, Member States may decide that agricultural parcels of an area of up to 0,1 ha on which an application for payment is not made, do not need to be declared, provided that the sum of such parcels does not exceed 1 ha, and/or may decide that a farmer who does not apply for any area-based direct payment does not have to declare his agricultural parcels in the case where the total area does not exceed 1 ha. In all cases, the farmer shall, indicate in his application that he has agricultural parcels at his disposal and at the request of the competent authorities, shall indicate their location.
3.   Member States shall provide, inter alia through electronic means, pre-established forms based on the areas determined in the previous year as well as graphic material indicating the location of those areas.
A Member State may decide that the aid application and the payment claim:
(a)
are valid if the beneficiary confirms the absence of changes with respect to the aid application and the payment claim submitted the previous year,
(b)
need to contain only changes with respect to the aid application and the payment claim submitted for the previous year.
However, with regard to the small farmers scheme provided for in Title V of Regulation (EU) No 1307/2013, that possibility shall be given to all farmers concerned.
4.   A Member State may decide that a single application shall cover a number of or all support schemes and measures referred to in Article 67 or other support schemes and measures.
5.   By way of derogation from Council Regulation (EEC, Euratom) No 1182/71 (38), the calculation of the date for the submission or the amendment of an aid application, of a payment claim or of any supporting documents, contracts or declarations under this Chapter shall be adapted to the specific requirements of the integrated system. The Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 115 concerning rules applicable to periods, dates and time limits where the final date for submission of applications or amendments is a public holiday, a Saturday or a Sunday.
