Article 27
Budget discipline procedure
1.   The Commission shall present to the European Parliament and to the Council, at the same time as the draft budget for financial year N, its forecasts for financial years N - 1, N and N + 1.
2.   If, on drawing up the draft budget for financial year N, there appears to be a risk that the amount referred to in Article 16 for financial year N will be exceeded, the Commission shall propose to the European Parliament and to the Council or to the Council, the measures necessary to ensure compliance with that amount.
3.   At any time, if the Commission considers that there is a risk that the amount referred to in Article 16 will be exceeded and that it cannot take adequate measures to remedy the situation under its powers, it shall propose other measures to ensure compliance with that amount. Those measures are adopted by the Council where the legal basis of the relevant measure is Article 43(3) TFEU or by the European Parliament and the Council where the legal basis of the relevant measure is Article 43(2) TFEU.
4.   If, at the end of financial year N, reimbursement requests from the Member States exceed or are likely to exceed the amount referred to in Article 16, the Commission shall:
(a)
consider the requests presented by Member States pro rata and within the limit of the available budget, and shall, adopt implementing acts, setting provisionally the amount of the payments for the month concerned;
(b)
determine, for all Member States, at the latest by 28 February of financial year N + 1, their situation with regard to Union financing for the financial year N;
(c)
adopt implementing acts setting the total amount of Union financing broken down by Member State, on the basis of a single rate of Union financing, within the limit of the budget which was available for the monthly payments;
(d)
effect, at the latest when the monthly payments are made for March of year N+1, any compensation to be carried out with respect to Member States.
The implementing acts provided for in points (a) and (c) of the first subparagraph shall be adopted in accordance with the advisory procedure referred to in Article 116(2).
