Article 110
Monitoring and evaluation of the CAP
1.   A common monitoring and evaluation framework shall be established with a view to measuring the performance of the CAP, and in particular of:
(a)
the direct payments provided for in Regulation (EU) No 1307/2013;
(b)
the market measures provided for in Regulation (EU) No 1308/2013;
(c)
the rural development measures provided for in Regulation (EU) No 1305/2013 and of,
(d)
the provisions of this Regulation.
The Commission shall monitor these policy measures based on reporting by Member States in accordance with the rules laid down in the Regulations referred to in the first subparagraph. The Commission shall establish a multiannual evaluation plan including periodic evaluations of specific instruments which it will carry out.
In order to ensure an effective performance measurement, the Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 115 regarding the content and construction of that framework.
2.   The performance of the CAP measures referred to in paragraph 1 shall be measured in relation to the following objectives:
(a)
viable food production, with a focus on agricultural income, agricultural productivity and price stability;
(b)
sustainable management of natural resources and climate action, with a focus on greenhouse gas emissions, biodiversity, soil and water;
(c)
balanced territorial development, with a focus on rural employment, growth and poverty in rural areas.
The Commission shall adopt implementing acts, laying down the set of indicators specific to the objectives referred to in the first subparagraph. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 116(3).
The indicators shall be linked to the structure and objectives of the policy and shall allow for the assessment of the progress, effectiveness and efficiency of the policy against objectives.
3.   The monitoring and evaluation framework shall reflect the structure of the CAP in the following way:
(a)
for the direct payments provided for in Regulation (EU) No 1307/2013, the market measures provided for in Regulation (EU) No 1308/2013 and the provisions of this Regulation, the Commission shall monitor these instruments based on reporting by Member States in accordance with the rules laid down in these regulations. The Commission shall establish a multi-annual evaluation plan with periodic evaluations of specific instruments to be carried out under Commission responsibility. Evaluations shall be carried out timely and by independent evaluators.
(b)
the monitoring and evaluation of rural development policy intervention will be carried out according to Articles 67 to 79 of Regulation (EU) No 1305/2013.
The Commission shall ensure that the combined impact of all CAP instruments referred to in paragraph 1 is measured and assessed in relation to the common objectives referred to in paragraph 2. The performance of the CAP in achieving its common objectives shall be measured and assessed on the basis of common impact indicators, and the underlying specific objectives on the basis of result indicators. Based on evidence provided in evaluations on the CAP, including evaluations on rural development programmes, as well as other relevant information sources, reports on measuring and assessing the joint performance of all CAP instruments shall be prepared by the Commission.
4.   Member States shall provide the Commission with all the information necessary to permit the monitoring and evaluation of the measures concerned. As far as possible, such information shall be based on established sources of data, such as the Farm Accountancy Data Network and Eurostat.
The Commission shall take into account the data needs and synergies between potential data sources, in particular their use for statistical purposes when appropriate.
The Commission shall adopt implementing acts, laying down rules on the information to be sent by the Member States, taking into account the need to avoid any undue administrative burden, as well as rules on the data needs and synergies between potential data sources. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 116(3).
5.   The Commission shall present an initial report on the implementation of this Article, including first results on the performance of the CAP, to the European Parliament and the Council by 31 December 2018. A second report including an assessment of the performance of the CAP shall be presented by 31 December 2021.
