Article 89
Other checks and penalties related to marketing rules
1.   Member States shall take measures to ensure that the products referred to in Article 119(1) of Regulation (EU) No 1308/2013 which are not labelled in conformity with the provisions of that Regulation are not placed on, or are withdrawn from, the market.
2.   Without prejudice to any specific provisions which may be adopted by the Commission, imports into the Union of the products specified in points (a) and (b) of paragraph 1 of Article 189 of Regulation (EU) No 1308/2013 shall be subject to checks to determine whether the conditions provided for in paragraph 1 of that Article are met.
3.   Member States shall carry out checks, based on a risk analysis, in order to verify whether products referred to in Annex I to Regulation (EU) No 1308/2013 conform to the rules laid down in Section I of Chapter I of Title II of Part II of Regulation (EU) No …/2013 and shall apply administrative penalties as appropriate.
4.   Without prejudice to acts regarding the wine sector adopted on the basis of Article 64, in the event of infringement of Union rules in the wine sector, Member States shall apply proportionate, effective and dissuasive administrative penalties. Such penalties shall not apply in the cases set out in points (a) to (d) of Article 64(2) and where the non-compliance is of a minor nature.
5.   In order to protect Union funds and the identity, provenance and quality of Union wine, the Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 115 relating to:
(a)
the establishment of an analytical databank of isotopic data to help detect fraud to be constructed on the basis of samples collected by Member States;
(b)
rules on control bodies and the mutual assistance between them;
(c)
rules on the common use of the findings of Member States;
6.   The Commission may adopt implementing acts laying down all measures necessary for:
(a)
the procedures relating to Member States' own databanks and to the analytical databank of isotopic data that will help detect fraud;
(b)
the procedures relating to cooperation and assistance between control authorities and bodies;
(c)
as regards the obligation referred to in paragraph 3, rules for performing the checks of compliance with marketing standards, rules on the authorities responsible for performing the checks, as well as on the content, the frequency and the marketing stage to which those checks are to apply.
Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 116(3).
