Article 99
Calculation of the administrative penalty
1.   The administrative penalty provided for in Article 91 shall be applied by means of reduction or exclusion of the total amount of the payments listed in Article 92 granted or to be granted to the beneficiary concerned in respect of aid applications he has submitted or will submit in the course of the calendar year of the finding.
For the calculation of those reductions and exclusions, account shall be taken of the severity, extent, permanence and reoccurrence of the non-compliance found as well as of the criteria set out in paragraphs 2, 3 and 4.
2.   In the case of non compliance due to negligence, the percentage of reduction shall not exceed 5 % and, in the case of reoccurrence, shall not exceed 15 %.
Member States may set up an early warning system that applies to cases of non-compliance which, given their minor severity, extent and duration, shall not, in duly justified cases, lead to a reduction or exclusion. Where a Member State decides to make use of this option, the competent authority shall send an early warning to the beneficiary, notifying the beneficiary of the finding and the obligation to take remedial action. In case a subsequent check establishes that the non-compliance has not been remedied, the reduction pursuant to the first subparagraph shall be applied retroactively.
However, cases of non-compliance which constitute a direct risk to public or animal health shall always lead to a reduction or exclusion.
Member States may give priority access to the farm advisory system to the beneficiaries who have received for the first time an early warning.
3.   In the case of intentional non-compliance, the percentage reduction shall in principle not be less than 20 % and may go as far as total exclusion from one or several aid schemes and may apply for one or more calendar years.
4.   In any event, the total amount of reductions and exclusions for one calendar year shall not be more than the total amount referred to in the first subparagraph of paragraph 1.
