Article 93
Rules on cross-compliance
1.   The rules on cross-compliance shall consist of the statutory management requirements under Union law and the standards for good agricultural and environmental condition of land established at national level as listed in Annex II, relating to the following areas:
(a)
environment, climate change and good agricultural condition of land;
(b)
public, animal and plant health;
(c)
animal welfare.
2.   The legal acts referred to in Annex II concerning the statutory management requirements shall apply in the version in force and, in the case of Directives, as implemented by the Member States.
3.   In addition, as regards the years 2015 and 2016, the rules on cross-compliance shall also include the maintenance of permanent pasture. The Member States which were Members of the Union on 1 January 2004 shall ensure that land which was under permanent pasture on the date provided for in the area aid applications for 2003 is maintained under permanent pasture within defined limits. The Member States which became Member of the Union in 2004 shall ensure that land which was under permanent pasture on 1 May 2004 is maintained under permanent pasture within defined limits. Bulgaria and Romania shall ensure that land which was under permanent pasture on 1 January 2007 is maintained under permanent pasture within defined limits. Croatia shall ensure that land which was under permanent pasture on 1 July 2013 is maintained under permanent pasture within defined limits.
The first subparagraph shall not apply to land under permanent pasture to be afforested if such afforestation is compatible with the environment and with the exclusion of plantations of Christmas trees and fast growing species cultivated in the short term.
4.   In order to take account of paragraph 3, the Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 115 laying down the rules on maintenance of permanent pasture, in particular in order to ensure that measures are taken to maintain the land under permanent pasture at the level of farmers, including individual obligations to be respected such as obligation to reconvert areas into permanent pasture where it is established that the ratio of land under permanent pasture is decreasing.
In order to ensure a correct application of the obligations of the Member States on the one hand and individual farmers on the other hand, as regards the maintenance of permanent pasture, the Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 115 to establish the conditions and methods for the determination of the ratio of permanent pasture and agricultural land that has to be maintained.
5.   For the purpose of paragraphs 3 and 4, "permanent pasture" means permanent pasture as defined in point (c) of Article 2 of Regulation (EC) No 1120/2009 in its original version.
