Article 3
Regular review
1.   By 31 December 2030 and every 5 years thereafter, and more often if substantial new scientific findings, such as revised WHO Air Quality Guidelines, point to the need for it, the Commission shall review the scientific evidence related to air pollutants and their effects on human health and the environment relevant to achieving the objectives set out in Article 1 and present a report with the main findings to the European Parliament and to the Council.
2.   The review referred to in paragraph 1 shall assess whether applicable air quality standards continue to be appropriate to achieve the objective of avoiding, preventing or reducing harmful effects on human health and the environment and whether additional air pollutants should be covered.
In order to achieve the objectives set out in Article 1, the review shall assess options and timelines for the alignment of air quality standards with the most recent WHO Air Quality Guidelines and the most up-to-date scientific evidence.
The review shall also assess all other provisions of this Directive, including those on postponement of the attainment deadlines and on transboundary air pollution, and furthermore, it shall assess the most up-to-date scientific evidence, including, where applicable, on air pollutants measured at the monitoring supersites referred to in Article 10 but currently not included in Annex I.
For the purposes of the review, the Commission shall take into account, inter alia, the following:
(a)
the latest scientific information from relevant Union bodies, international organisations, such as the WHO and the UNECE Convention on Long-range Transboundary Air Pollution, and other relevant scientific organisations;
(b)
behavioural changes, fiscal policies and technological developments impacting air quality and its assessment;
(c)
air quality situations and associated impacts on human health and the environment, including the effects of ozone on vegetation, in Member States;
(d)
direct and indirect healthcare and environmental costs associated with air pollution;
(e)
the nature and socioeconomic impacts of complementary actions to be implemented to achieve new objectives as well as a cost-benefit analysis of these actions;
(f)
progress made in implementing national and Union reduction measures for pollutants and improving air quality;
(g)
relevant source legislation at Union level for sectors and activities that contribute to air pollution, including progress made in implementing such legislation;
(h)
relevant information submitted for the purposes of the review to the Commission by Member States;
(i)
the introduction by individual Member States of more stringent air quality standards in accordance with Article 193 TFEU.
3.   The European Environment Agency shall assist the Commission in carrying out the review.
4.   Where the Commission deems it necessary, as a result of the review, it shall present a proposal to revise air quality standards or to cover other air pollutants. Furthermore, where the Commission deems it necessary, it shall present proposals to introduce or revise any relevant source legislation in order to contribute to achieving the proposed revised air quality standards at Union level.
5.   If the Commission identifies during the review that further measures are needed to achieve applicable air quality standards in a significant area of the Union territory, the Commission may propose further action to be taken at Union level.
