Article 8
Assessment criteria
1.   Member States shall assess ambient air quality with respect to the pollutants referred to in Article 7 in all their zones, in accordance with the criteria laid down in paragraphs 2 to 6 of this Article and in accordance with Annex IV.
2.   In all zones classified as above the assessment thresholds established for the pollutants referred to in Article 7, fixed measurements shall be used to assess the ambient air quality. Those fixed measurements may be supplemented by modelling applications or indicative measurements to assess air quality and to provide adequate information on the spatial distribution of air pollutants and on the spatial representativeness of fixed measurements.
3.   From 2 years following the adoption of the implementing acts referred to in paragraph 7 of this Article, modelling applications or indicative measurements shall be used in addition to fixed measurements to assess the ambient air quality in all zones where the level of pollutants exceeds a relevant limit value or target value set out in Annex I.
The modelling applications or indicative measurements referred to in the first subparagraph shall provide information on the spatial distribution of pollutants. Where modelling applications are used, they shall also provide information on the spatial representativeness of fixed measurements and they shall be carried out as often as appropriate but at least every 5 years.
4.   In all zones classified as below the assessment thresholds established for the pollutants referred to in Article 7, modelling applications, indicative measurements, objective estimations or a combination thereof shall be sufficient for the assessment of the ambient air quality.
5.   The results of modelling applications used in accordance with paragraph 3 or 4 of this Article or Article 9(3), or of indicative measurements shall be taken into account for the purpose of assessing air quality with respect to the limit values and target values.
If fixed measurements with an area of spatial representativeness covering the area of exceedance calculated by the modelling application are available, a Member State may choose not to report the modelled exceedance as an exceedance of the relevant limit values and target values.
6.   If modelling applications used in accordance with paragraphs 3 or 4 show an exceedance of any limit value or target value in an area of the zone that is not covered by fixed measurements and their area of spatial representativeness, at least one additional fixed or indicative measurement may be used at possible additional air pollution hotspots in the zone as identified by the modelling application.
If modelling applications used in accordance with Article 9(3) show an exceedance of any limit value or target value in an area of the zone that is not covered by fixed measurements and their area of spatial representativeness, at least one additional fixed or indicative measurement shall be used at possible additional air pollution hotspots in the zone as identified by the modelling application.
Where additional fixed measurements are used, those measurements shall be established within 2 calendar years after the exceedance was modelled. Where additional indicative measurements are used, those measurements shall be established within 1 calendar year after the exceedance was modelled. The measurements shall cover at least 1 calendar year in accordance with the minimum data coverage requirements set out in Point B of Annex V, to assess the concentration level of the relevant pollutant.
Where a Member State chooses not to conduct any additional fixed or indicative measurements, the exceedance shown by modelling applications shall be used for air quality assessment.
7.   By 11 June 2026, the Commission shall provide, by means of implementing acts, further technical details for:
(a)
modelling applications, including how results from modelling applications and indicative measurements shall be taken into account when assessing air quality and how potential exceedances that are identified by those assessment methods can be verified;
(b)
determining the spatial representativeness of sampling points.
Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 26(2).
8.   The use of bio indicators shall be considered where regional patterns of the impact on ecosystems are to be assessed, including in accordance with the monitoring undertaken under Directive (EU) 2016/2284.
