Article 9
Sampling points
1.   The location of sampling points for the measurement of sulphur dioxide, nitrogen dioxide and oxides of nitrogen, particulate matter (PM10 and PM2,5), benzene, carbon monoxide, arsenic, cadmium, lead, nickel, benzo(a)pyrene and ozone in ambient air shall be determined in accordance with Annex IV.
2.   In each zone where the level of pollutants exceeds the assessment threshold specified in Annex II, the number of sampling points for each pollutant shall not be less than the minimum number of sampling points specified in Points A and C of Annex III.
3.   For zones where the level of pollutants exceeds the relevant assessment threshold specified in Annex II, but not the respective limit values, target values and critical levels specified in Annex I, the minimum number of sampling points for fixed measurements may be reduced by up to 50 %, in accordance with Points A and C of Annex III, provided that the following conditions are met:
(a)
indicative measurements or modelling applications provide sufficient information for the assessment of air quality with regard to limit values, target values, critical levels, alert thresholds and information thresholds, as well as adequate information for the public, in addition to the information provided by the sampling points for fixed measurements;
(b)
the number of sampling points to be installed and the spatial resolution of indicative measurements and modelling applications are sufficient for the concentration of the relevant pollutant to be established in accordance with the data quality objectives specified in Points A and B of Annex V and enable assessment results to meet the requirements set out in Point E of Annex V;
(c)
the number of indicative measurements, if used to meet the requirements of this paragraph, is at least the same as the number of fixed measurements that are being replaced and the indicative measurements are evenly distributed over the calendar year;
(d)
for ozone, nitrogen dioxide is measured at all remaining sampling points measuring ozone except at rural background locations for ozone assessment as referred to in Point B of Annex IV.
4.   One or more sampling points adapted to the monitoring objective set out in Section 3, Point A, of Annex VII, shall be installed in a Member State’s territory to supply data on concentrations of the ozone precursor substances listed in Point B of that Section at locations determined in accordance with Point C of that Section.
5.   Nitrogen dioxide shall be measured at a minimum of 50 % of the ozone sampling points required under Point A, Table 2, of Annex III. That measurement shall be continuous, except at rural background locations, as referred to in Point B of Annex IV, where other measurement methods may be used.
6.   Each Member State shall, in accordance with Annex IV, ensure that the distribution of sampling points used for the calculation of the average exposure indicators for PM2,5 and nitrogen dioxide reflect the general population exposure adequately. The number of sampling points shall be no less than that determined by application of Point B of Annex III.
7.   Sampling points at which exceedances of a relevant limit value or target value specified in Section 1 of Annex I were recorded within the previous 3 years shall not be relocated, unless a relocation is necessary due to special circumstances, including spatial development. Relocation of such sampling points shall be supported by modelling applications or indicative measurements and shall, wherever possible, ensure continuity of measurements and be done within their area of spatial representativeness. A detailed justification of any relocation of such sampling points shall be fully documented in accordance with the requirements set out in Point D of Annex IV.
8.   To assess the contribution of benzo(a)pyrene in ambient air, each Member State shall monitor other relevant polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons at a limited number of sampling points. Those polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons shall include at least: benzo(a)anthracene, benzo(b)fluoranthene, benzo(j)fluoranthene, benzo(k)fluoranthene, indeno(1,2,3-cd)pyrene, and dibenz(a,h)anthracene. Sampling points for those polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons shall be co-located with sampling points for benzo(a)pyrene and shall be selected in such a way that geographical variation and long-term trends can be identified.
9.   In addition to the monitoring required under Article 10, Member States shall monitor ultrafine particles levels in accordance with Point D of Annex III and Section 4 of Annex VII. Monitoring of black carbon concentrations may be undertaken at the same locations.
