Article 23
Transmission of information and reporting
1.   Member States shall ensure that information on ambient air quality is made available to the Commission within the required timescale in accordance with the implementing acts referred to in paragraph 5 of this Article, and irrespective of compliance with data quality objectives for data coverage laid down in Point B of Annex V.
2.   For the specific purpose of assessing compliance with the limit values, target values, average exposure reduction obligations and critical levels, the information referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article shall be made available to the Commission no later than 9 months after the end of each calendar year and shall include:
(a)
the changes made in that year to the list and delimitation of zones or average exposure territorial units established under Article 6;
(b)
the list of zones and average exposure territorial units and the levels of pollutants assessed;
(c)
for zones in which the levels of one or more pollutants are higher than the limit values, target values or critical levels, as well as for average exposure territorial units where the levels of one or more pollutants are higher than the level determined by the average exposure reduction obligations:
(i)
the dates and periods when such levels were observed;
(ii)
if appropriate, an assessment on contributions from natural sources and from re-suspension of particulates following winter-sanding or winter-salting of roads to the levels assessed, as provided to the Commission under Articles 16 and 17.
3.   Member States shall report to the Commission in accordance with paragraph 1 information concerning the levels recorded and the duration of the periods during which the alert threshold or information threshold was exceeded.
4.   Member States shall provide the information referred to in Point D of Annex IV to the Commission within 3 months of being requested to do so.
5.   The Commission shall adopt, by means of implementing acts, measures:
(a)
specifying the information to be made available by Member States pursuant to this Article as well as the timescales in which such information is to be communicated;
(b)
identifying ways of streamlining the way data are reported and the reciprocal exchange of information and data from networks and individual sampling points measuring ambient air pollution within Member States.
Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to Article 26(2).
