Article 19
Air quality plans and air quality roadmaps
1.   Where, in given zones, the levels of pollutants in ambient air exceed any limit value or target value laid down in Section 1 of Annex I, Member States shall establish air quality plans for those zones that set out appropriate measures to achieve the limit value or target value concerned and to keep the exceedance period as short as possible, and in any case no longer than 4 years from the end of the calendar year in which the first exceedance was recorded. Those air quality plans shall be established as soon as possible and no later than 2 years after the calendar year during which that exceedance of any limit value or target value was recorded.
Where in a given zone an exceedance of a limit value is already covered by an air quality roadmap, Member States shall ensure that the measures set out in that roadmap are appropriate to keep the exceedance period as short as possible and, where relevant, take additional and more effective measures and follow the procedure for updating an air quality roadmap as set out in paragraph 5.
2.   Where in territorial units covering at least one zone, the levels of pollutants in ambient air exceed any ozone target value, laid down in Section 2 of Annex I, Member States shall establish air quality plans for those territorial units that set out appropriate measures in order to achieve the ozone target value and to keep the exceedance period as short as possible. Those air quality plans shall be established as soon as possible and no later than 2 years after the calendar year during which the exceedance of the ozone target value was recorded.
Where in a given territorial unit an exceedance of an ozone target value is already covered by an air quality roadmap, Member States shall ensure that the measures set out in that roadmap are appropriate to keep the exceedance period as short as possible and, where relevant, follow the procedure for updating an air quality roadmap as set out in paragraph 5.
However, Member States may refrain from establishing such air quality plans or air quality roadmaps to address the exceedance of ozone where there is no significant potential to reduce ozone concentrations, considering geographical and meteorological conditions, and where the measures would entail disproportionate costs.
Where an air quality plan or air quality roadmap is not established, Member States shall provide to the public and the Commission a detailed justification as to why there is no significant potential to reduce the exceedance resulting in a decision not to establish an air quality plan or air quality roadmap.
At least every 5 years, Member States shall reassess the potential to reduce ozone concentrations.
For territorial units where the ozone target value is exceeded, Member States shall ensure that the relevant national air pollution control programme prepared pursuant to Article 6 of Directive (EU) 2016/2284 includes measures addressing ozone precursors covered by that Directive.
3.   Where in a given average exposure territorial unit, the average exposure reduction obligation laid down in Section 5 of Annex I is not achieved, Member States shall establish air quality plans for those average exposure territorial units that set out appropriate measures to achieve the average exposure reduction obligation and to keep the exceedance period as short as possible. Those air quality plans shall be established as soon as possible and no later than 2 years after the calendar year during which the exceedance of the average exposure reduction obligation was recorded.
4.   Where from 1 January 2026 until 31 December 2029 in a zone or territorial unit, the levels of pollutants are above any limit value or target value to be attained by 1 January 2030 as laid down in Section 1, Table 1, of Annex I and in Section 2, Point B, of Annex I, and without prejudice to paragraph 2, third subparagraph, of this Article, Member States shall establish an air quality roadmap for the pollutant concerned to attain the respective limit values or target values by the expiration of the attainment deadline. Those air quality roadmaps shall be established as soon as possible and no later than 2 years after the calendar year during which the exceedance was recorded.
However, Member States may refrain from establishing such air quality roadmaps when the baseline scenario following the information required by Point A, point 5, of Annex VIII, shows that the limit value or target value will be achieved with the measures that are already in force, including when the exceedance is caused by temporary activities influencing the levels of pollutants in a single year. Where an air quality roadmap is not established pursuant to this subparagraph, Member States shall provide to the public and the Commission a detailed justification.
5.   Where exceedances of any limit value, average exposure reduction obligation or target value persist during the third calendar year after the deadline for establishment of an air quality plan or air quality roadmap, and without prejudice to paragraph 2, third subparagraph, Member States shall update the air quality plan or air quality roadmap and the measures therein, including their impact on projected emissions and concentrations, no later than 5 years following the deadline for establishment of the previous air quality plan or air quality roadmap and take additional and more effective measures to keep the exceedance period as short as possible.
6.   Air quality plans and air quality roadmaps shall contain at least the following information:
(a)
the information listed in Point A, points 1 to 7, of Annex VIII;
(b)
where applicable, the information listed in Point A, points 8, 9 and 10, of Annex VIII;
(c)
information on relevant abatement measures listed in Point B, point 2, of Annex VIII.
Member States shall include, where appropriate, the measures referred to in Article 20(2) and specific measures aiming at the protection of sensitive population and vulnerable groups, including children, in their air quality plans and air quality roadmaps.
Member States shall assess, when preparing air quality plans or air quality roadmaps, the risk of exceeding the respective alert thresholds for the pollutants concerned. That analysis shall be used for establishing short-term action plans where applicable.
Where air quality plans or air quality roadmaps are to be established in respect of several pollutants or air quality standards, Member States shall, where appropriate, establish integrated air quality plans or air quality roadmaps covering all pollutants and air quality standards concerned.
Member States shall, to the extent feasible, ensure consistency of their air quality plans and air quality roadmaps with other plans that have a significant impact on air quality, including those required under Directives 2002/49/EC, 2010/75/EU and (EU) 2016/2284 and under climate, biodiversity, energy, transport and agriculture legislation.
7.   Member States shall consult the public, in accordance with Directive 2003/35/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (21), and the competent authorities, which, by reason of their responsibilities in the field of air pollution and air quality, are likely to be concerned by the implementation of the air quality plans and air quality roadmaps, on draft air quality plans and draft air quality roadmaps and on any significant updates of air quality plans and air quality roadmaps prior to their finalisation. Member States shall ensure that the public, when consulted, has access to the draft air quality plan or draft air quality roadmap containing the minimum information required under Annex VIII to this Directive and, where possible, a non-technical summary of the information referred to in this subparagraph.
Member States shall encourage the active involvement of all interested parties in the preparation, implementation and update of air quality plans and air quality roadmaps. Where air quality plans and air quality roadmaps are being prepared, Member States shall ensure that stakeholders whose activities contribute to the exceedance situation are encouraged to propose measures they are able to take to help end the exceedances and that non-governmental organisations, such as environmental and health organisations, consumer organisations, organisations representing the interests of sensitive population and vulnerable groups, other relevant health-care bodies, including organisations representing healthcare professionals, and the relevant industrial federations are encouraged to take part in those consultations.
8.   Air quality plans and air quality roadmaps shall be communicated to the Commission within 2 months of their adoption.
