Article 6
Natural gas supply for transport
1.   Member States shall ensure, by means of their national policy frameworks, that an appropriate number of refuelling points for LNG are put in place at maritime ports, to enable LNG inland waterway vessels or seagoing ships to circulate throughout the TEN-T Core Network by 31 December 2025. Member States shall cooperate with neighbouring Member States where necessary to ensure adequate coverage of the TEN-T Core Network.
2.   Member States shall ensure, by means of their national policy frameworks, that an appropriate number of refuelling points for LNG are put in place at inland ports, to enable LNG inland waterway vessels or seagoing ships to circulate throughout the TEN-T Core Network by 31 December 2030. Member States shall cooperate with neighbouring Member States where necessary to ensure adequate coverage of the TEN-T Core Network.
3.   Member States shall designate in their national policy frameworks the maritime and inland ports that are to provide access to the refuelling points for LNG referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2, also taking into consideration actual market needs.
4.   Member States shall ensure, by means of their national policy frameworks, that an appropriate number of refuelling points for LNG accessible to the public are put in place by 31 December 2025, at least along the existing TEN-T Core Network, in order to ensure that LNG heavy-duty motor vehicles can circulate throughout the Union, where there is demand, unless the costs are disproportionate to the benefits, including environmental benefits.
5.   The Commission shall assess the application of the requirement in paragraph 4 and, as appropriate, submit a proposal to amend this Directive by 31 December 2027, taking into account the LNG heavy-duty motor vehicles market, in order to ensure that an appropriate number of refuelling points for LNG accessible to the public are put in place in each Member State.
6.   Member States shall ensure that an appropriate LNG distribution system is available in their territory, including loading facilities for LNG tank vehicles, in order to supply the refuelling points referred to in paragraphs 1, 2 and 4. By way of derogation, neighbouring Member States may, in the context of their national policy frameworks, form a pool for the purposes of fulfilling this requirement. Pooling agreements shall be the subject of the reporting obligations of the Member States under this Directive.
7.   Member States shall ensure, by means of their national policy frameworks, that an appropriate number of CNG refuelling points accessible to the public are put in place by 31 December 2020, in order to ensure, in line with the sixth indent of Article 3(1), that CNG motor vehicles can circulate in urban/suburban agglomerations and other densely populated areas, and, where appropriate, within networks determined by the Member States.
8.   Member States shall ensure, by means of their national policy frameworks, that an appropriate number of CNG refuelling points accessible to the public are put in place by 31 December 2025, at least along the existing TEN-T Core Network, to ensure that CNG motor vehicles can circulate throughout the Union.
9.   Member States shall ensure that CNG refuelling points for motor vehicles deployed or renewed as from 18 November 2017 comply with the technical specifications set out in point 3.4 of Annex II.
10.   Without prejudice to Regulation (EU) No 1025/2012, the Union shall pursue the development by the relevant European or international standardisation organisations of standards, including detailed technical specifications, for:
(a)
refuelling points for LNG for maritime and inland waterway transport;
(b)
refuelling points for LNG and CNG motor vehicles.
11.   The Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 8 to:
(a)
supplement this Article and points 3.1, 3.2 and 3.4 of Annex II, in order to require compliance of the infrastructures to be deployed or renewed with the technical specifications contained in the standards to be developed pursuant to points (a) and (b) of paragraph 10 of this Article, where the relevant ESOs have recommended only one technical solution with technical specifications as described in a relevant European standard compatible with the relevant international standards, where applicable;
(b)
update the references to the standards referred to in the technical specifications set out or to be set out in point 3 of Annex II where those standards are replaced by new versions thereof adopted by the relevant European or international standardisation organisations.
It is of particular importance that the Commission follow its usual practice and carry out consultations with experts, including Member States' experts, before adopting those delegated acts.
Those delegated acts shall provide for transitional periods of at least 24 months before the technical specifications contained therein, or amendments thereof, become binding on the infrastructure to be deployed or renewed.
12.   In the absence of a standard containing detailed technical specifications for refuelling points for LNG for maritime and inland waterway transport, referred to in point (a) of paragraph 10, and in particular in the absence of those specifications relating to bunkering of LNG, the Commission, taking into account the work ongoing within the IMO, the CCNR, the Danube Commission and other relevant international fora, shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 8 to lay down:
—
requirements for interfaces of bunker transfer of LNG in maritime and inland waterway transport,
—
requirements related to safety aspects of the onshore storage and bunkering procedure of LNG in maritime and inland waterway transport.
It is of particular importance that the Commission follow its usual practice and carry out consultations with relevant groups of experts on maritime transport and on inland waterway transport, including experts from national maritime or inland navigation authorities, before adopting those delegated acts.
