Article 8
1. The Commission shall be responsible for appraising, taking decisions to finance and administering activities covered by this Regulation according to the budgetary and other procedures in force, and in particular those laid down in the Financial Regulation applicable to the general budget of the European Communities.
2. Every second year, the Commission shall adopt, in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 9(2) strategic guidelines and priorities for implementing the activities to be carried out in the following years. It shall inform the European Parliament thereof.
3. Decisions relating to grants of EUR 2,5 million or more for individual activities financed under this Regulation shall be adopted by the Commission under the procedure laid down in Article 9(2).
4. The Commission shall inform the Committee referred to in Article 9(1) succinctly of any financing decisions it intends to take with regard to grants of less than EUR 2,5 million for activities covered by this Regulation. The information shall be made available not later than one week before the decision is taken.
5. The Commission shall be authorised to approve any extra commitments needed for covering any expected or real cost overruns or additional requirements in connection with the activities, provided that the overrun or additional requirement is less than or equal to 20 % of the initial commitment fixed by the financing decision.
6. All financing agreements or contracts concluded under this Regulation shall provide for the Commission and the Court of Auditors to conduct on-the-spot checks according to the usual procedures laid down by the Commission under the rules in force, in particular those of the Financial Regulation applicable to the general budget of the European Communities.
7. Where operations are the subject of financing agreements between the Community and the recipient country, such agreements shall stipulate that the payment of taxes, duties or any other charges is not to be covered by the Community.
8. Participation in invitations to tender and the award of contracts shall be open on equal terms to all natural and legal persons of the Member States and of the recipient country. It may be extended to other developing countries and, in exceptional cases, which are fully justified, to other third countries.
9. Supplies shall originate in the Member States, the recipient country or other developing countries. In exceptional cases, where circumstances warrant, supplies may originate in other countries.
10. Particular attention shall be paid to:
- the pursuit of cost-effectiveness and sustainable impact of activities,
- the clear definition and monitoring of objectives and indicators of achievement for all activities.

