Whereas:
(1) Depletion of natural resources and environmental degradation have direct effects on economic development and especially on the livelihoods of local communities, including indigenous peoples, and thus counteract the alleviation of poverty through sustainable development.
(2) Current patterns of production and consumption have undeniable transboundary and global consequences, in particular where the atmosphere, the hydrosphere, soil condition and biological diversity are concerned.
(3) The Community and its Member States are signatories to the Rio Declaration and the Agenda 21 action programme and are committed to the United Nations General Assembly Special Session (Ungass) Resolution "Programme for the further implementation of Agenda 21".
(4) The Community and its Member States are parties to Multilateral Environment Agreements, notably the Convention on Biological Diversity, the Framework Convention on Climate Change and the Convention to Combat Desertification. They are thus committed to take into account the common but differentiated responsibilities of developed parties and developing parties on these subjects.
(5) The internal and external aspects of the European Community's environment policy need to be coherent in order to effectively respond to the challenges identified in the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED) and its follow-up processes.
(6) The Community and its Member States are committed to the Organisation of Economic Cooperation and Development/Development Assistance Committee's (OECD/DAC) "Shaping the 21st Century Strategy" which calls for the support for the implementation of national strategies for sustainable development in all countries by 2005, so as to ensure that current trends in the loss of environmental resources are effectively reversed at both global and national levels by 2015.
(7) The European Parliament and the Council have adopted Decision No 2179/98/EC of 24 September 1998 on the review of the European Community Programme of policy and action in relation to the environment and sustainable development "Towards Sustainability"(4), which calls for a strengthened role for the Community in international cooperation in environment and sustainable development. The basic strategy of the Programme is to achieve full integration of environmental policy in other policies, including development policy.
(8) The European Council held in Cardiff in June 1998 welcomed the Commission Communication "Partnership for Integration" setting out a strategy for integrating environment considerations into European Union policies and endorsed the principle that major policy proposals should be accompanied by the appraisal of their environmental impact.
(9) The Council and the Member States adopted on 15 July 1996 a Resolution on Environmental Assessment in Development Cooperation.
(10) In its Resolution of 30 November 1998, the Council acknowledges the key role that indigenous peoples play in the conservation and sustainable use of natural resources.
(11) Sustainable development relies on the integration of the environmental dimension into the development process.
(12) Since resources are limited, the creation of suitable policies, strategies and tools and the implementation of experimental schemes are essential elements for such integration in economic and development cooperation.
(13) The financial instruments available to the Community for supporting sustainable development in developing countries should be supplemented.
(14) Coordination of operations financed under Community instruments should be improved.
(15) Council Regulation (EC) No 722/97 of 22 April 1997 on environmental measures in developing countries in the context of sustainable development(5) set out the framework for Community assistance aimed at enabling developing countries to integrate the environmental dimension in their development process. Regulation (EC) No 722/97 was applicable until 31 December 1999. The experience acquired during the implementation of Regulation (EC) No 722/97 should be reflected in this Regulation.
(16) Provision should be made for funding the activities referred to in this Regulation.
(17) This Regulation lays down, for the entire duration of the programme it establishes, a financial framework constituting the prime reference, within the meaning of point 33 of the Interinstitutional Agreement between the European Parliament, the Council and the Commission of 6 May 1999, on budgetary discipline and improvement of the budgetary procedure(6), for the budgetary authority during the annual budgetary procedure.
(18) Detailed rules for implementation should be laid down, in particular the form of action, the cooperation partners and the decision-making procedure.
(19) The measures necessary for the implementation of this Regulation should be adopted in accordance with Council Decision 1999/468/EC of 28 June 1999, laying down the procedures for the exercise of implementing powers conferred on the Commission(7),
HAVE ADOPTED THIS REGULATION:

