Article 61
1. Each Member State shall, after consultation of the Management Board, appoint, for a three-year term which may be renewed, one member and one alternate to the Committee for Medicinal Products for Human Use and one member and one alternate to the Committee for Medicinal Products for Veterinary Use.
The alternates shall represent and vote for the members in their absence and may act as rapporteurs in accordance with Article 62.
Members and alternates shall be chosen for their role and experience in the evaluation of medicinal products for human and veterinary use as appropriate and shall represent the competent national authorities.
2. The committees may co-opt a maximum of five additional members chosen on the basis of their specific scientific competence. These members shall be appointed for a term of three years, which may be renewed, and shall not have alternates.
With a view to the co-opting of such members, the committees shall identify the specific complementary scientific competence of the additional member(s). Co-opted members shall be chosen among experts nominated by Member States or the Agency.
3. The members of each Committee may be accompanied by experts in specific scientific or technical fields.
4. The Executive Director of the Agency or his representative and representatives of the Commission shall be entitled to attend all meetings of the committees, working parties and scientific advisory groups and all other meetings convened by the Agency or its committees.
5. In addition to their task of providing objective scientific opinions to the Community and Member States on the questions which are referred to them, the members of each committee shall ensure that there is appropriate coordination between the tasks of the Agency and the work of competent national authorities, including the consultative bodies concerned with the marketing authorisation.
6. Members of the committees and experts responsible for evaluating medicinal products shall rely on the scientific evaluation and resources available to national marketing authorisation bodies. Each competent national authority shall monitor the scientific level and independence of the evaluation carried out and facilitate the activities of nominated committee members and experts. Member States shall refrain from giving committee members and experts any instruction which is incompatible with their own individual tasks or with the tasks and responsibilities of the Agency.
7. When preparing the opinion, each committee shall use its best endeavours to reach a scientific consensus. If such a consensus cannot be reached, the opinion shall consist of the position of the majority of members and divergent positions, with the grounds on which they are based.
8. Each committee shall establish its own rules of procedure.
These rules shall, in particular, lay down:
(a) procedures for appointing and replacing the Chairman;
(b) procedures relating to working parties and scientific advisory groups; and
(c) a procedure for the urgent adoption of opinions, particularly in relation to the provisions of this Regulation on market surveillance and pharmacovigilance.
They shall enter into force after receiving a favourable opinion from the Commission and the Management Board.

