Article 6
1. Each application for the authorisation of a medicinal product for human use shall specifically and completely include the particulars and documents as referred to in Articles 8(3), 10, 10a, 10b or 11 of, and Annex I to, Directive 2001/83/EC. The documents must include a statement to the effect that clinical trials carried out outside the European Union meet the ethical requirements of Directive 2001/20/EC. These particulars and documents shall take account of the unique, Community nature of the authorisation requested and, otherwise than in exceptional cases relating to the application of the law on trade marks, shall include the use of a single name for the medicinal product.
The application shall be accompanied by the fee payable to the Agency for the examination of the application.
2. In the case of a medicinal product for human use containing or consisting of genetically modified organisms within the meaning of Article 2 of Directive 2001/18/EC, the application shall be accompanied by:
(a) a copy of the competent authorities' written consent to the deliberate release into the environment of the genetically modified organisms for research and development purposes where provided for in Part B of Directive 2001/18/EC or in Part B of Council Directive 90/220/EEC of 23 April 1990 on the deliberate release into the environment of genetically modified organisms(16);
(b) the complete technical dossier supplying the information required by Annexes III and IV to Directive 2001/18/EC;
(c) the environmental risk assessment in accordance with the principles set out in Annex II to Directive 2001/18/EC; and
(d) the results of any investigations performed for the purposes of research or development.
Articles 13 to 24 of Directive 2001/18/EC shall not apply to medicinal products for human use containing or consisting of genetically modified organisms.
3. The Agency shall ensure that the opinion of the Committee for Medicinal Products for Human Use is given within 210 days after receipt of a valid application.
The duration of the analysis of the scientific data in the file concerning the application for marketing authorisation must be at least 80 days, except in cases where the rapporteur and co-rapporteur declare that they have completed their assessment before that time.
On the basis of a duly reasoned request, the said Committee may call for the duration of the analysis of the scientific data in the file concerning the application for marketing authorisation to be extended.
In the case of a medicinal product for human use containing or consisting of genetically modified organisms, the opinion of the said Committee shall respect the environmental safety requirements laid down by Directive 2001/18/EC. During the process of evaluating applications for marketing authorisations for medicinal products for human use containing or consisting of genetically modified organisms, the rapporteur shall carry out necessary consultations of bodies that the Community or Member States have set up in accordance with Directive 2001/18/EC.
4. The Commission shall, in consultation with the Agency, Member States and interested parties, draw up a detailed guide regarding the form in which applications for authorisation are to be presented.

