Article 39
1. Without prejudice to paragraphs 4 and 5, a marketing authorisation shall be valid for five years.
2. The marketing authorisation may be renewed after five years on the basis of a re-evaluation by the Agency of the risk-benefit balance.
To this end, the marketing authorisation holder shall submit a consolidated list of all documents submitted in respect of quality, safety and efficacy, including all variations introduced since the marketing authorisation was granted, at least six months before the marketing authorisation ceases to be valid in accordance with paragraph 1. The Agency may require the applicant to submit the listed documents at any time.
3. Once renewed, the marketing authorisation shall be valid for an unlimited period, unless the Commission decides, on justified grounds relating to pharmacovigilance, to proceed with one additional five-year renewal in accordance with paragraph 2.
4. Any authorisation which is not followed by the actual placing of the medicinal product for veterinary use on the Community market within three years after authorisation shall cease to be valid.
5. When an authorised medicinal product previously placed on the market is no longer actually present on the market for three consecutive years, the authorisation shall cease to be valid.
6. In exceptional circumstances and on public and/or animal health grounds the Commission may grant exemptions from the provisions of paragraphs 4 and 5. Such exemptions must be duly justified.
7. In exceptional circumstances and following consultation with the applicant, authorisation may be granted subject to a requirement for the applicant to introduce specific procedures, in particular concerning product safety, notification to the relevant authorities of any incident relating to its use, and action to be taken. This authorisation may be granted only for objective, verifiable reasons. Continuation of the authorisation shall be linked to the annual reassessment of these conditions.
8. When an application is submitted for a marketing authorisation in respect of veterinary medicinal products of major interest, particularly from the point of view of animal health and from the viewpoint of therapeutic innovation, the applicant may request an accelerated assessment procedure. The request shall be duly substantiated.
If the Committee for Medicinal Products for Veterinary Use accepts the request, the time-limit laid down in Article 31(3), first subparagraph, shall be reduced to 150 days.
9. When adopting its opinion, the said Committee shall include a proposal concerning the conditions for the prescription or use of the veterinary medicinal products.
10. Veterinary medicinal products which have been authorised in accordance with the provisions of this Regulation shall benefit from the provisions on protection in Articles 13 and 13a of Directive 2001/82/EC.

