Article 64
1. The Executive Director shall be appointed by the Management Board, on a proposal from the Commission, for a period of five years on the basis of a list of candidates proposed by the Commission following a call for expressions of interest published in the Official Journal of the European Union and elsewhere. Before appointment, the candidate nominated by the Management Board shall be invited forthwith to make a statement to the European Parliament and to answer any questions put by its Members. His mandate may be renewed once. The Management Board may, upon a proposal from the Commission, remove the Executive Director from his post.
2. The Executive Director shall be the legal representative of the Agency. He shall be responsible:
(a) for the day-to-day administration of the Agency;
(b) for managing all the Agency resources necessary for conducting the activities of the committees referred to in Article 56(1), including making available appropriate scientific and technical support;
(c) for ensuring that the time-limits laid down in Community legislation for the adoption of opinions by the Agency are complied with;
(d) for ensuring appropriate coordination between the committees referred to in Article 56(1);
(e) for the preparation of the draft statement of estimates of the Agency's revenue and expenditure, and execution of its budget;
(f) for all staff matters;
(g) for providing the secretariat for the Management Board.
3. Each year the Executive Director shall submit a draft report covering the activities of the Agency in the previous year and a draft work programme for the coming year to the Management Board for approval, making a distinction between the Agency's activities concerning medicinal products for human use, those concerning herbal medicinal products and those concerning veterinary medicinal products.
The draft report covering the activities of the Agency in the previous year shall include information about the number of applications evaluated within the Agency, the time taken for completion of the evaluation and the medicinal products authorised, rejected or withdrawn.

