Article 45
1. Where the supervisory authorities or the competent authorities of any other Member State are of the opinion that the manufacturer or importer established within the Community is no longer fulfilling the obligations laid down in Title VII of Directive 2001/82/EC, they shall forthwith inform the Committee for Medicinal Products for Veterinary Use and the Commission, stating their reasons in detail and indicating the course of action proposed.
The same shall apply where a Member State or the Commission considers that one of the measures envisaged in Title VIII of Directive 2001/82/EC should be applied in respect of the veterinary medicinal product concerned or where the said Committee has delivered an opinion to that effect in accordance with Article 30 of this Regulation.
2. The Commission shall request the opinion of the Agency within a time-limit which it shall determine in the light of the urgency of the matter, in order to examine the reasons advanced. Whenever practicable, the holder of the marketing authorisation for the medicinal product shall be invited to provide oral or written explanations.
3. Following an opinion by the Agency, the Commission shall adopt the necessary provisional measures, which shall be applied immediately.
A final decision shall be adopted within six months, in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 87(3).
4. Where urgent action is essential to protect human or animal health or the environment, a Member State may, on its own initiative or at the Commission's request, suspend the use on its territory of a veterinary medicinal product which has been authorised in accordance with this Regulation.
When it does so on its own initiative, the Member State shall inform the Commission and the Agency of the reasons for its action at the latest on the next working day following the suspension. The Agency shall inform the other Member States without delay. The Commission shall immediately initiate the procedure provided for in paragraphs 2 and 3.
5. In this case, the Member State shall ensure that health-care professionals are rapidly informed of its action and the reasons for the action. Networks set up by professional associations may be used to this effect. Member States shall inform the Commission and the Agency of actions taken for this purpose.
6. The suspensive measures referred to in paragraph 4 may be maintained until such time as a definitive decision has been reached in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 87(3).
7. The Agency shall, upon request, inform any person concerned of the final decision and make the decision publicly accessible, immediately after it has been taken.

Chapter 3
Pharmacovigilance
