Article 38
1. Without prejudice to Article 71 of Directive 2001/82/EC, a marketing authorisation which has been granted in accordance with this Regulation shall be valid throughout the Community. It shall confer the same rights and obligations in each of the Member States as a marketing authorisation granted by that Member State in accordance with Article 5 of Directive 2001/82/EC.
Authorised veterinary medicinal products shall be entered in the Community Register of Medicinal Products and shall be given a number which shall appear on the packaging.
2. Notification of marketing authorisation shall be published in the Official Journal of the European Union, quoting in particular the date of authorisation and the number in the Community Register, any International Non-proprietary Name (INN) of the active substance of the medicinal product, its pharmaceutical form, and any Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical Veterinary Code (ATC Vet Code).
3. The Agency shall immediately publish the assessment report on the veterinary medicinal product drawn up by the Committee for Medicinal Products for Veterinary Use and the reasons for its opinion in favour of granting authorisation, after deletion of any information of a commercially confidential nature.
The European Public Assessment Report (EPAR) shall include a summary written in a manner that is understandable to the public. The summary shall contain in particular a section relating to the conditions of use of the medicinal product.
4. After a marketing authorisation has been granted, the holder of the authorisation shall inform the Agency of the dates of actual placing on the market of the veterinary medicinal product in Member States, taking into account the various presentations authorised.
The holder shall also notify the Agency if the product ceases to be placed on the market, either temporarily or permanently. Such notification shall, other than in exceptional circumstances, be made no less than 2 months before the interruption in the placing of the product on the market.
Upon request by the Agency, particularly in the context of pharmacovigilance, the marketing authorisation holder shall provide the Agency with all data relating to the volume of sales of the medicinal product at Community level, broken down by Member State, and any data in the holder's possession relating to the volume of prescriptions.

