Article 10
1. Within 15 days after receipt of the opinion referred to in Article 5(2), the Commission shall prepare a draft of the decision to be taken in respect of the application.
Where a draft decision envisages the granting of a marketing authorisation, it shall include or make reference to the documents mentioned in Article 9(4)(a), (b), (c) and (d).
Where the draft decision is not in accordance with the opinion of the Agency, the Commission shall annex a detailed explanation of the reasons for the differences.
The draft decision shall be forwarded to Member States and the applicant.
2. The Commission shall take a final decision in accordance with, and within 15 days after the end of, the procedure referred to in Article 87(3).
3. The Standing Committee on Medicinal Products for Human Use referred to in Article 87(1) shall adjust its rules of procedure so as to take account of the tasks incumbent upon it under this Regulation.
The adjustments shall provide that:
(a) the opinion of the said Standing Committee is to be given in writing;
(b) Member States shall have 22 days to forward their written observations on the draft decision to the Commission. However, if a decision has to be taken urgently, a shorter time-limit may be set by the Chairman according to the degree of urgency involved. This time-limit shall not, otherwise than in exceptional circumstances, be shorter than 5 days;
(c) Member States may request in writing that the draft decision referred to in paragraph 1 be discussed by a plenary meeting of the said Standing Committee, stating their reasons in detail.
4. Where, in the opinion of the Commission, a Member State's written observations raise important new questions of a scientific or technical nature which the opinion delivered by the Agency has not addressed, the Chairman shall suspend the procedure and refer the application back to the Agency for further consideration.
5. The Commission shall adopt the provisions necessary for the implementation of paragraph 4 in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 87(2).
6. The Agency shall disseminate the documents referred to in Article 9(4)(a), (b), (c) and (d).

