Article 34
1. The Agency shall forthwith inform the applicant if the opinion of the Committee for Medicinal Products for Veterinary Use is that:
(a) the application does not satisfy the criteria for authorisation set out in this Regulation;
(b) the summary of the product characteristics should be amended;
(c) the labelling or package leaflet of the product is not in compliance with Title V of Directive 2001/82/EC;
(d) the authorisation should be granted subject to the conditions provided for in Article 39(7).
2. Within 15 days after receipt of the opinion referred to in paragraph 1, the applicant may provide written notice to the Agency that he wishes to request a re-examination of the opinion. In that case the applicant shall forward to the Agency the detailed grounds for the request within 60 days after receipt of the opinion.
Within 60 days after receipt of the grounds for the request, the said Committee shall re-examine its opinion in accordance with the conditions laid down in Article 62(1), fourth subparagraph. The reasons for the conclusion reached shall be annexed to the final opinion.
3. Within 15 days after its adoption, the Agency shall forward the final opinion of the said Committee to the Commission, to Member States and to the applicant, together with a report describing the assessment of the veterinary medicinal product by the Committee and stating the reasons for its conclusions.
4. If an opinion is favourable to the granting of the relevant authorisation to place the relevant veterinary medicinal product on the market, the following documents shall be annexed to the opinion:
(a) a draft summary of the product characteristics, as referred to in Article 14 of Directive 2001/82/EC; where appropriate, this draft shall reflect differences in the veterinary conditions in the Member States;
(b) in the case of a veterinary medicinal product intended for administration to food-producing animals, a statement of the maximum residue level which may be accepted by the Community in accordance with Regulation (EEC) No 2377/90;
(c) details of any conditions or restrictions which should be imposed on the supply or use of the veterinary medicinal product concerned, including the conditions under which the veterinary medicinal product may be made available to users, in conformity with the criteria laid down in Directive 2001/82/EC;
(d) details of any recommended conditions or restrictions with regard to the safe and effective use of the medicinal product;
(e) the draft text of the labelling and package leaflet proposed by the applicant, presented in accordance with Title V of Directive 2001/82/EC;
(f) the assessment report.

