Article 65
1. The Management Board shall consist of one representative of each Member State, two representatives of the Commission and two representatives of the European Parliament.
In addition, two representatives of patients' organisations, one representative of doctors' organisations and one representative of veterinarians' organisations shall be appointed by the Council in consultation with the European Parliament on the basis of a list drawn up by the Commission which includes appreciably more names than there are posts to be filled. The list drawn up by the Commission shall be forwarded to the European Parliament, together with the relevant background documents. As quickly as possible, and within three months of notification, the European Parliament may submit its views for consideration to the Council, which shall then appoint the Management Board.
The members of the Management Board shall be appointed in such a way as to guarantee the highest levels of specialist qualifications, a broad spectrum of relevant expertise and the broadest possible geographic spread within the European Union.
2. The members of the Management Board shall be appointed on the basis of their relevant expertise in management and, if appropriate, experience in the field of medicinal products for human or veterinary use.
3. Each Member State and the Commission shall appoint their members of the Management Board as well as an alternate who will replace the member in his absence and vote on his behalf.
4. The term of office of the representatives shall be three years. The term of office may be renewed.
5. The Management Board shall elect its Chairman from among its members.
The term of office of the Chairman shall be three years and shall expire when he ceases to be a member of the Management Board. The term of office may be renewed once.
6. Decisions of the Management Board shall be adopted by a majority of two-thirds of its members.
7. The Management Board shall adopt its rules of procedure.
8. The Management Board may invite the chairmen of the scientific committees to attend its meetings, but they shall not have the right to vote.
9. The Management Board shall approve the annual work programme of the Agency programme and forward it to the European Parliament, the Council, the Commission and the Member States.
10. The Management Board shall adopt the annual report on the Agency's activities and forward it by 15 June at the latest to the European Parliament, the Council, the Commission, the European Economic and Social Committee, the Court of Auditors and the Member States.

