Article 3
Transparency of work programmes of standardisation bodies
1.   At least once a year, each European standardisation organisation and national standardisation body shall establish its work programme. That work programme shall contain information on the standards and European standardisation deliverables which a European standardisation organisation or national standardisation body intends to prepare or amend, which it is preparing or amending and which it has adopted in the period of the preceding work programme, unless these are identical or equivalent transpositions of international or European standards.
2.   The work programme shall indicate, in respect of each standard and European standardisation deliverable:
(a)
the subject matter;
(b)
the stage attained in the development of the standards and European standardisation deliverables;
(c)
the references of any international standards taken as a basis.
3.   Each European standardisation organisation and national standardisation body shall make its work programme available on its website or any other publicly available website, as well as make a notice of the existence of the work programme available in a national or, where appropriate, European publication of standardisation activities.
4.   No later than at the time of publication of its work programme, each European standardisation organisation and national standardisation body shall notify the existence thereof to the other European standardisation organisations and national standardisation bodies and to the Commission. The Commission shall make that information available to the Member States via the committee referred to in Article 22.
5.   National standardisation bodies may not object to a subject for standardisation in their work programme being considered at European level in accordance with the rules laid down by the European standardisation organisations and may not undertake any action which could prejudice a decision in this regard.
6.   During the preparation of a harmonised standard or after its approval, national standardisation bodies shall not take any action which could prejudice the harmonisation intended and, in particular, shall not publish in the field in question a new or revised national standard which is not completely in line with an existing harmonised standard. After publication of a new harmonised standard, all conflicting national standards shall be withdrawn within a reasonable deadline.
