Article 10
Standardisation requests to European standardisation organisations
1.   The Commission may within the limitations of the competences laid down in the Treaties, request one or several European standardisation organisations to draft a European standard or European standardisation deliverable within a set deadline. European standards and European standardisation deliverables shall be market-driven, take into account the public interest as well as the policy objectives clearly stated in the Commission’s request and based on consensus. The Commission shall determine the requirements as to the content to be met by the requested document and a deadline for its adoption.
2.   The decisions referred to in paragraph 1 shall be adopted in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 22(3) after consultation of the European standardisation organisations and the European stakeholder organisations receiving Union financing in accordance with this Regulation as well as the committee set up by the corresponding Union legislation, when such a committee exists, or after other forms of consultation of sectoral experts.
3.   The relevant European standardisation organisation shall indicate, within one month following its receipt, if it accepts the request referred to in paragraph 1.
4.   Where a request for funding is made, the Commission shall inform the relevant European standardisation organisations, within two months following the receipt of the acceptance referred to in paragraph 3, about the award of a grant for drafting a European standard or a European standardisation deliverable.
5.   The European standardisation organisations shall inform the Commission about the activities undertaken for the development of the documents referred to in paragraph 1. The Commission together with the European standardisation organisations shall assess the compliance of the documents drafted by the European standardisation organisations with its initial request.
6.   Where a harmonised standard satisfies the requirements which it aims to cover and which are set out in the corresponding Union harmonisation legislation, the Commission shall publish a reference of such harmonised standard without delay in the Official Journal of the European Union or by other means in accordance with the conditions laid down in the corresponding act of Union harmonisation legislation.
