Article 28
Waste management plans
1.   Member States shall ensure that their competent authorities establish, in accordance with Articles 1, 4, 13 and 16, one or more waste management plans.
Those plans shall, alone or in combination, cover the entire geographical territory of the Member State concerned.
2.   The waste management plans shall set out an analysis of the current waste management situation in the geographical entity concerned, as well as the measures to be taken to improve environmentally sound preparing for re-use, recycling, recovery and disposal of waste and an evaluation of how the plan will support the implementation of the objectives and provisions of this Directive.
3.   The waste management plans shall contain, as appropriate and taking into account the geographical level and coverage of the planning area, at least the following:
(a)
the type, quantity and source of waste generated within the territory, the waste likely to be shipped from or to the national territory, and an evaluation of the development of waste streams in the future;
(b)
existing waste collection schemes and major disposal and recovery installations, including any special arrangements for waste oils, hazardous waste or waste streams addressed by specific Community legislation;
(c)
an assessment of the need for new collection schemes, the closure of existing waste installations, additional waste installation infrastructure in accordance with Article 16, and, if necessary, the investments related thereto;
(d)
sufficient information on the location criteria for site identification and on the capacity of future disposal or major recovery installations, if necessary;
(e)
general waste management policies, including planned waste management technologies and methods, or policies for waste posing specific management problems.
4.   The waste management plan may contain, taking into account the geographical level and coverage of the planning area, the following:
(a)
organisational aspects related to waste management including a description of the allocation of responsibilities between public and private actors carrying out the waste management;
(b)
an evaluation of the usefulness and suitability of the use of economic and other instruments in tackling various waste problems, taking into account the need to maintain the smooth functioning of the internal market;
(c)
the use of awareness campaigns and information provision directed at the general public or at a specific set of consumers;
(d)
historical contaminated waste disposal sites and measures for their rehabilitation.
5.   Waste management plans shall conform to the waste planning requirements laid down in Article 14 of Directive 94/62/EC and the strategy for the implementation of the reduction of biodegradable waste going to landfills, referred to in Article 5 of Directive 1999/31/EC.
