Article 3
Definitions
For the purposes of this Directive, the following definitions shall apply:
1.
‘waste’ means any substance or object which the holder discards or intends or is required to discard;
2.
‘hazardous waste’ means waste which displays one or more of the hazardous properties listed in Annex III;
3.
‘waste oils’ means any mineral or synthetic lubrication or industrial oils which have become unfit for the use for which they were originally intended, such as used combustion engine oils and gearbox oils, lubricating oils, oils for turbines and hydraulic oils;
4.
‘bio-waste’ means biodegradable garden and park waste, food and kitchen waste from households, restaurants, caterers and retail premises and comparable waste from food processing plants;
5.
‘waste producer’ means anyone whose activities produce waste (original waste producer) or anyone who carries out pre-processing, mixing or other operations resulting in a change in the nature or composition of this waste;
6.
‘waste holder’ means the waste producer or the natural or legal person who is in possession of the waste;
7.
‘dealer’ means any undertaking which acts in the role of principal to purchase and subsequently sell waste, including such dealers who do not take physical possession of the waste;
8.
‘broker’ means any undertaking arranging the recovery or disposal of waste on behalf of others, including such brokers who do not take physical possession of the waste;
9.
‘waste management’ means the collection, transport, recovery and disposal of waste, including the supervision of such operations and the after-care of disposal sites, and including actions taken as a dealer or broker;
10.
‘collection’ means the gathering of waste, including the preliminary sorting and preliminary storage of waste for the purposes of transport to a waste treatment facility;
11.
‘separate collection’ means the collection where a waste stream is kept separately by type and nature so as to facilitate a specific treatment;
12.
‘prevention’ means measures taken before a substance, material or product has become waste, that reduce:
(a)
the quantity of waste, including through the re-use of products or the extension of the life span of products;
(b)
the adverse impacts of the generated waste on the environment and human health; or
(c)
the content of harmful substances in materials and products;
13.
‘re-use’ means any operation by which products or components that are not waste are used again for the same purpose for which they were conceived;
14.
‘treatment’ means recovery or disposal operations, including preparation prior to recovery or disposal;
15.
‘recovery’ means any operation the principal result of which is waste serving a useful purpose by replacing other materials which would otherwise have been used to fulfil a particular function, or waste being prepared to fulfil that function, in the plant or in the wider economy. Annex II sets out a non-exhaustive list of recovery operations;
16.
‘preparing for re-use’ means checking, cleaning or repairing recovery operations, by which products or components of products that have become waste are prepared so that they can be re-used without any other pre-processing;
17.
‘recycling’ means any recovery operation by which waste materials are reprocessed into products, materials or substances whether for the original or other purposes. It includes the reprocessing of organic material but does not include energy recovery and the reprocessing into materials that are to be used as fuels or for backfilling operations;
18.
‘regeneration of waste oils’ means any recycling operation whereby base oils can be produced by refining waste oils, in particular by removing the contaminants, the oxidation products and the additives contained in such oils;
19.
‘disposal’ means any operation which is not recovery even where the operation has as a secondary consequence the reclamation of substances or energy. Annex I sets out a non-exhaustive list of disposal operations;
20.
‘best available techniques’ means best available techniques as defined in Article 2(11) of Directive 96/61/EC.
