Article 6
Obligations of manufacturers
1.   When placing their electrical equipment on the market, manufacturers shall ensure that it has been designed and manufactured in accordance with the safety objectives referred to in Article 3 and set out in Annex I.
2.   Manufacturers shall draw up the technical documentation referred to in Annex III and carry out the conformity assessment procedure referred to in Annex III or have it carried out.
Where compliance of electrical equipment with the safety objectives referred to in Article 3 and set out in Annex I has been demonstrated by the conformity assessment procedure referred to in the first subparagraph, manufacturers shall draw up an EU declaration of conformity and affix the CE marking.
3.   Manufacturers shall keep the technical documentation referred to in Annex III and the EU declaration of conformity for 10 years after the electrical equipment has been placed on the market.
4.   Manufacturers shall ensure that procedures are in place for series production to remain in conformity with this Directive. Changes in product design or characteristics and changes in the harmonised standards referred to in Article 12, the international or national standards referred to in Articles 13 and 14, or in other technical specifications by reference to which conformity of electrical equipment is declared shall be adequately taken into account.
When deemed appropriate with regard to the risks presented by electrical equipment, manufacturers shall, to protect the health and safety of consumers, carry out sample testing of electrical equipment made available on the market, investigate, and, if necessary, keep a register of complaints, of non-conforming electrical equipment and electrical equipment recalls, and shall keep distributors informed of any such monitoring.
5.   Manufacturers shall ensure that electrical equipment which they have placed on the market bears a type, batch or serial number or other element allowing its identification, or, where the size or nature of the electrical equipment does not allow it, that the required information is provided on its packaging or in a document accompanying the electrical equipment.
6.   Manufacturers shall indicate on the electrical equipment their name, registered trade name or registered trade mark and the postal address at which they can be contacted or, where that is not possible, on its packaging or in a document accompanying the electrical equipment. The address shall indicate a single point at which the manufacturer can be contacted. The contact details shall be in a language easily understood by end-users and market surveillance authorities.
7.   Manufacturers shall ensure that the electrical equipment is accompanied by instructions and safety information in a language which can be easily understood by consumers and other end-users, as determined by the Member State concerned. Such instructions and safety information, as well as any labelling, shall be clear, understandable and intelligible.
8.   Manufacturers who consider or have reason to believe that electrical equipment which they have placed on the market is not in conformity with this Directive shall immediately take the corrective measures necessary to bring that electrical equipment into conformity, to withdraw it or recall it, if appropriate. Furthermore, where the electrical equipment presents a risk, manufacturers shall immediately inform the competent national authorities of the Member States in which they made the electrical equipment available on the market to that effect, giving details, in particular, of the non-compliance and of any corrective measures taken.
9.   Manufacturers shall, further to a reasoned request from a competent national authority, provide it with all the information and documentation in paper or electronic form necessary to demonstrate the conformity of the electrical equipment with this Directive, in a language which can be easily understood by that authority. They shall cooperate with that authority, at its request, on any action taken to eliminate the risks posed by electrical equipment which they have placed on the market.
