Article 21
Compliant electrical equipment which presents a risk
1.   Where, having carried out an evaluation under Article 19(1), a Member State finds that although electrical equipment is in compliance with this Directive, it presents a risk to the health or safety of persons, or to domestic animals or to property it shall require the relevant economic operator to take all appropriate measures to ensure that the electrical equipment concerned, when placed on the market, no longer presents that risk, to withdraw the electrical equipment from the market or to recall it within a reasonable period, commensurate with the nature of the risk, as it may prescribe.
2.   The economic operator shall ensure that corrective action is taken in respect of all electrical equipment concerned that he has made available on the market throughout the Union.
3.   The Member State shall immediately inform the Commission and the other Member States. That information shall include all available details, in particular the data necessary for the identification of the electrical equipment concerned, the origin and the supply chain of the electrical equipment, the nature of the risk involved and the nature and duration of the national measures taken.
4.   The Commission shall without delay enter into consultation with the Member States and the relevant economic operator or operators and shall evaluate the national measures taken. On the basis of the results of that evaluation, the Commission shall decide by means of implementing acts whether the national measure is justified or not, and where necessary, propose appropriate measures.
The implementing acts referred to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 23(2).
On duly justified imperative grounds of urgency relating to the protection of health and safety of persons, or of domestic animals or of property, the Commission shall adopt immediately applicable implementing acts in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 23(3).
5.   The Commission shall address its decision to all Member States and shall immediately communicate it to them and the relevant economic operator or operators.
