Article 13
Monitoring, evaluation and dissemination of results
1.   The Commission shall, in close cooperation with the Member States, monitor the implementation of the actions under the Programme in the light of its objectives and indicators, including available information on the amount of climate-related expenditure. It shall report thereon to the committee referred to in Article 17(1), and shall keep the European Parliament and the Council informed.
2.   At the request of the Commission, Member States shall submit available information on the implementation and impact of the Programme. Such requests for information shall be proportionate and shall avoid imposing any unnecessary increase in the administrative burden on Member States.
3.   Half way through the duration of the Programme, but not later than 30 June 2017, the Commission shall draw up and present to the European Parliament and to the Council a mid-term evaluation report on the achievement of the objectives of the Programme, the state-of-play regarding the implementation of the thematic priorities set out in Annex I, and the efficiency of the use of resources and the Union added value of the Programme, in view of a decision on the renewal, modification or suspension of its thematic priorities. The mid-term evaluation report shall, additionally, address the scope for simplification, the internal and external coherence of the Programme, the continued relevance of all objectives, as well as the contribution of the actions to the achievement of the objectives set out in Article 168 TFEU. It shall take into account evaluation results on the long-term impact of the previous programme.
In the mid-term evaluation report, the Commission shall, in particular, indicate the following:
(a)
if it is not possible to implement and achieve one or more of the thematic priorities listed in Annex I in line with the objectives of the Programme and within the remaining duration of the Programme;
(b)
whether the evaluation identified one or more specific, significant thematic priorities which are not listed in Annex I, but which have become necessary to achieve the general and specific objectives of the Programme;
(c)
the reasons for the conclusions referred to in points (a) and (b).
The long-term impact and the sustainability of effects of the Programme shall be evaluated with a view to feeding into a decision on the possible renewal, modification or suspension of a subsequent programme.
4.   The Commission shall make the results of actions undertaken pursuant to this Regulation publicly available and shall ensure that they are widely disseminated in order to contribute to improving health in the Union.
