Article 7
Types of intervention
1.   In accordance with Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012, financial contributions by the Union shall take the form of grants, public procurement or any other form of intervention necessary for achieving the objectives of the Programme.
2.   Grants may be awarded to fund:
(a)
actions having a clear Union added value co-financed by the competent authorities that are responsible for health in the Member States or in the third countries participating in the Programme pursuant to Article 6, or by public sector bodies and non-governmental bodies, as referred to in Article 8(1), acting individually or as a network, mandated by those competent authorities;
(b)
actions having a clear Union added value explicitly provided for and duly justified in the annual work programmes co-financed by other public, non-governmental or private bodies, as referred to in Article 8(1), including international organisations active in the area of health and, in the latter case, where appropriate, without a previous call for proposals;
(c)
the functioning of non-governmental bodies as referred to in Article 8(2), where financial support is necessary for the pursuit of one or more of the specific objectives of the Programme.
3.   Grants paid by the Union shall not exceed 60 % of eligible costs for an action relating to an objective of the Programme or for the functioning of a non-governmental body. In cases of exceptional utility, the contribution by the Union may be up to 80 % of eligible costs.
For the actions referred to in point (a) of paragraph 2, exceptional utility is achieved, inter alia, where:
(a)
at least 30 % of the budget of the proposed action is allocated to Member States whose GNI per inhabitant is less than 90 % of the Union average; and
(b)
bodies from at least 14 participating countries participate in the action, out of which at least four are countries whose GNI per inhabitant is less than 90 % of the Union average.
4.   By way of derogation from Article 130(2) of Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012 and in duly justified cases, the Commission may, in the annual work programme for 2014, consider the costs directly linked to the implementation of supported actions to be eligible for financing from 1 January 2014, even if they were incurred by the beneficiary before the grant application was submitted.
