Article 13
Sampling and analysis
1.   Member States shall take all necessary measures to check by sampling that the sulphur content of fuels used complies with Articles 3 to 7. The sampling shall commence on the date on which the relevant limit for maximum sulphur content in the fuel comes into force. It shall be carried out periodically with sufficient frequency and quantities such that the samples are representative of the fuel examined, and in the case of marine fuel, of the fuel being used by vessels while in relevant sea areas and ports. The samples shall be analysed without undue delay.
2.   The following means of sampling, analysis and inspection of marine fuel shall be used:
(a)
inspection of ships' logbooks and bunker delivery notes; and
(b)
as appropriate, the following means of sampling and analysis:
(i)
sampling of the marine fuel for on-board combustion while being delivered to ships, in accordance with the Guidelines for the sampling of fuel oil for determination of compliance with the revised Annex VI to MARPOL, adopted on 17 July 2009 by Resolution 182(59) of the Marine Environment Protection Committee (MEPC) of the IMO, and analysis of its sulphur content; or
(ii)
sampling and analysis of the sulphur content of marine fuel for on-board combustion contained in tanks, where technically and economically feasible, and in sealed bunker samples on board ships.
3.   The reference method adopted for determining the sulphur content shall be ISO method 8754 (2003) or EN ISO 14596:2007.
In order to determine whether marine fuel delivered to, and used on board, ships is compliant with the sulphur limits required by Articles 4 to 7, the fuel verification procedure set out in Appendix VI to Annex VI to MARPOL shall be used.
4.   The Commission shall be empowered to adopt implementing acts concerning:
(a)
the frequency of sampling;
(b)
the sampling methods;
(c)
the definition of a sample representative of the fuel examined.
Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 17(2).
