Article 6
Maximum sulphur content of marine fuels used in territorial seas, exclusive economic zones and pollution control zones of Member States, including SOx Emission Control Areas, and by passenger ships operating on regular services to or from Union ports
1.   Member States shall take all necessary measures to ensure that marine fuels are not used in the areas of their territorial seas, exclusive economic zones and pollution control zones if the sulphur content of those fuels by mass exceeds:
(a)
3,50 % as from 18 June 2014;
(b)
0,50 % as from 1 January 2020.
This paragraph shall apply to all vessels of all flags, including vessels whose journey began outside of the Union, without prejudice to paragraphs 2 and 5 of this Article and Article 7.
2.   Member States shall take all necessary measures to ensure that marine fuels are not used in the areas of their territorial seas, exclusive economic zones and pollution control zones falling within SOx Emission Control Areas if the sulphur content of those fuels by mass exceeds:
(a)
1,00 % until 31 December 2014;
(b)
0,10 % as from 1 January 2015.
This paragraph shall apply to all vessels of all flags, including vessels whose journey began outside the Union.
The Commission shall have due regard to any future changes to the requirements pursuant to Annex VI to MARPOL applicable within SOx Emission Control Areas, and, where appropriate, without undue delay make any relevant proposals with a view to amending this Directive accordingly.
3.   The application date for paragraph 2 for any new sea areas, including ports, designated by the IMO as SOx Emission Control Areas in accordance with Regulation 14(3)(b) of Annex VI to MARPOL shall be 12 months after the date of entry into force of the designation.
4.   Member States shall be responsible for the enforcement of paragraph 2 at least in respect of:
—
vessels flying their flag, and
—
in the case of Member States bordering SOx Emission Control Areas, vessels of all flags while in their ports.
Member States may also take additional enforcement action in respect of other vessels in accordance with international maritime law.
5.   Member States shall take all necessary measures to ensure that marine fuels are not used in their territorial seas, exclusive economic zones and pollution control zones falling outside SOx Emission Control Areas by passenger ships operating on regular services to or from any Union port if the sulphur content of those fuels exceeds 1,50 % by mass until 1 January 2020.
Member States shall be responsible for the enforcement of this requirement at least in respect of vessels flying their flag and vessels of all flags while in their ports.
6.   Member States shall require the correct completion of ships' logbooks, including fuel-changeover operations.
7.   Member States shall endeavour to ensure the availability of marine fuels which comply with this Directive and inform the Commission of the availability of such marine fuels in its ports and terminals.
8.   If a ship is found by a Member State not to be in compliance with the standards for marine fuels which comply with this Directive, the competent authority of the Member State is entitled to require the ship to:
(a)
present a record of the actions taken to attempt to achieve compliance; and
(b)
provide evidence that it attempted to purchase marine fuel which complies with this Directive in accordance with its voyage plan and, if it was not made available where planned, that attempts were made to locate alternative sources for such marine fuel and that, despite best efforts to obtain marine fuel which complies with this Directive, no such marine fuel was made available for purchase.
The ship shall not be required to deviate from its intended voyage or to delay unduly the voyage in order to achieve compliance.
If a ship provides the information referred to in the first subparagraph, the Member State concerned shall take into account all relevant circumstances and the evidence presented to determine the appropriate action to take, including not taking control measures.
A ship shall notify its flag State and the competent authority of the relevant port of destination when it cannot purchase marine fuel which complies with this Directive.
A port State shall notify the Commission when a ship has presented evidence of the non-availability of marine fuels which comply with this Directive.
9.   Member States shall, in accordance with Regulation 18 of Annex VI to MARPOL:
(a)
maintain a publicly available register of local suppliers of marine fuel;
(b)
ensure that the sulphur content of all marine fuels sold in their territory is documented by the supplier on a bunker delivery note, accompanied by a sealed sample signed by the representative of the receiving ship;
(c)
take action against marine fuel suppliers that have been found to deliver fuel that does not comply with the specification stated on the bunker delivery note;
(d)
ensure that remedial action is taken to bring any non-compliant marine fuel discovered into compliance.
10.   Member States shall ensure that marine diesel oils are not placed on the market in their territory if the sulphur content of those marine diesel oils exceeds 1,50 % by mass.
