Article 24
Record of authorised fishing vessels
1.   The following Union fishing vessels shall be registered in the IOTC record of fishing vessels:
(a)
vessels of 24 metres or more in overall length;
(b)
vessels of less than 24 metres in overall length, if they fish outside the exclusive economic zone (EEZ) of a Member State.
2.   Union fishing vessels that are not registered in the IOTC record referred to in paragraph 1 shall not be authorised to fish for, retain on board, tranship or land IOTC species or support any fishing activity or set DFADs in the Area.
This paragraph shall not apply to vessels of less than 24 metres in overall length operating in the EEZ of a Member State.
3.   Member States shall submit to the Commission the list of vessels complying with the requirements of paragraph 1 which are authorised to operate in the Area. That list shall include the following information for each vessel:
(a)
name of vessel(s), register number(s);
(b)
IMO number;
(c)
previous name(s) (if any) or indication of its non-availability;
(d)
previous flag(s) (if any) or indication of its non-availability;
(e)
details of previous deletion from other registries (if any) or indication of their non-availability;
(f)
international radio call sign(s) (if any) or indication of its non-availability;
(g)
port of registration;
(h)
type of vessel(s), overall length (m) and gross tonnage (GT);
(i)
total volume of fish hold(s) in cubic metres;
(j)
name and address of owner(s) and operator(s);
(k)
name and address of beneficial owner(s), if known and different from vessel owner/operator, or indication of their non-availability;
(l)
name, address and registration number of company operating the vessel (if any);
(m)
gear used;
(n)
time period(s) authorised for fishing and/or transhipping;
(o)
colour photographs of the vessel showing:
—
the starboard and portsides, each showing the whole structure;
—
the bow;
(p)
at least one colour photograph clearly showing at least one of the external markings specified in point (a).
4.   Member States shall promptly notify the Commission of any addition to, deletion from, or amendment of the IOTC record. The Commission shall send that information to the IOTC Secretariat without delay.
5.   During each year, the Commission shall, if necessary, provide the IOTC Secretariat with updated information on Union fishing vessels registered in the IOTC record referred to in paragraph 1.
