Article 36
Chartering notification scheme
1.   The chartering Member State shall notify the Commission of any vessel to be identified as chartered in accordance with this Article without delay within 15 days and no later than 72 hours before commencement of fishing activities under a chartering agreement, by submitting electronically the following information with respect to each chartered vessel:
(a)
the name (in both original registration language and Latin alphabets), registration number of the chartered vessel, and IMO number;
(b)
the name and contact address of the beneficial owner of the vessel;
(c)
the description of the vessel, including the overall length, type of vessel and the type of fishing method(s) to be used under the chartering agreement;
(d)
a copy of the chartering agreement and any fishing authorisation or licence it has issued to the vessel, including the quota allocation or fishing possibility assigned to the vessel, and the duration of the chartering arrangement;
(e)
its consent to the chartering agreement; and
(f)
the measures adopted to implement the provisions included in the chartering agreement.
2.   The flag Member State shall notify the Commission of any vessel to be identified as chartered in accordance with this Article, without delay within 17 days and no later than 96 hours before commencement of fishing activities under a chartering agreement by submitting electronically the information with respect to each chartered vessel referred to in paragraph 1.
3.   Upon receiving the information from Member States set out in paragraph 1 or 2, the Commission shall forward the following information to the IOTC Secretariat:
(a)
its consent to the chartering agreement;
(b)
the measures adopted to implement the provisions included in the chartering agreement; and
(c)
its agreement to comply with CMMs.
4.   Member States referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 shall immediately inform the Commission of the start, suspension, resumption and termination of the fishing operations under the chartering agreement.
5.   Member States chartering fishing vessels shall report to the Commission by 10 February of each year the particulars of chartering agreements made in the previous calendar year, including information on catches taken and fishing effort deployed by the chartered vessels as well as the level of observer coverage achieved on the chartered vessels in accordance with Article 35(1), point (j). The Commission shall forward that information to the IOTC Secretariat by 28 February of each year.
