Article 21
Marine turtles
1.   Union fishing vessels shall apply the following mitigation measures:
(a)
longline vessels shall carry line cutters and de-hookers in order to facilitate the appropriate handling and prompt release of marine turtles (species of families Cheloniidae and Dermochelyidae) that have been caught or entangled, taking all reasonable steps to ensure safe release and handling following the IOTC handling guidelines;
(b)
purse seine vessels shall, to the extent practicable:
—
avoid encirclement of marine turtles, and if a marine turtle is encircled or entangled, take practicable measures to safely release the turtle in accordance with the IOTC handling guidelines;
—
release all marine turtles found entangled in FADs or fishing gear;
—
where a marine turtle is entangled in the net, stop the net roll as soon as the turtle comes out of the water; before resuming the net roll, the operator shall disentangle the turtle without injuring it, and assist its recovery before returning it to the water; and
—
carry and employ dip nets, when appropriate, to handle marine turtles.
2.   Union fishing vessels shall bring aboard, if practicable, any captured marine turtle that is comatose or inactive as soon as possible and foster its recovery, including aiding in its resuscitation, before safely returning it to the water.
3.   Member States shall ensure that Union fishing vessels use proper mitigation, identification, handling and de-hooking techniques and keep on board all necessary equipment for the release of marine turtles, taking all reasonable steps in accordance with handling guidelines in the IOTC Marine Turtle Identification Cards provided in IOTC handling guidelines referred to in paragraph 1, point (a).
4.   Member States shall report on the implementation of the Guidelines of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) to Reduce Sea Turtle Mortality in Fishing Operations.
5.   Member States shall send all data on their vessels interactions with marine turtles to the Commission, in accordance with Article 51(1). Those data shall include the level of logbook or observer coverage and an estimate of total mortality of marine turtles incidentally caught in their fisheries.
6.   Union fishing vessels shall record all incidents involving marine turtles during fishing operations, including status on release (dead or alive) in the logbooks in accordance with Article 14 of Regulation (EC) No 1224/2009. They shall report such incidents to their flag Member States with information, where possible, on the species, location of capture, conditions, actions taken on board and location of release. Member States shall send that information to the Commission, in accordance with Article 51(1).
