Article 43
Authorisation to enter, land and tranship in ports
1.   After receiving the relevant information pursuant to Article 42, a port Member State shall decide whether to authorise or deny the third-country fishing vessel entry into and use of its ports. Where a third-country fishing vessel has been denied entry, the port Member State shall inform the flag State of the vessel and the Commission, or a body designated by it. The Commission, or the body designated by it, shall forward the information to the IOTC Secretariat without delay. Port Member States shall deny entry to fishing vessels included in the IOTC IUU vessel list, that of any other RFMO or the Union IUU vessel list.
2.   Where a prior notice has been received through e-PSM application, the port Member State shall communicate its decision to authorise or deny entry into port through the same application.
3.   Pursuant to Article 8(1) of Regulation (EC) No 1005/2008, in the case of carrier vessels, the IOTC transhipment declaration is required and shall be submitted at least 48 hours prior to the intended time of landing. In order to ensure that landings are consistent with the reported catch amount of each catching fishing vessel, the Member States where transhipped catches are to be landed shall take the appropriate measures to verify the accuracy of the information received and shall cooperate with the flag State of the carrier vessel, any port State involved in the transhipments to be landed and the flag states of the catching fishing vessels involved. That verification shall be carried out in such a way that the carrier vessel suffers the minimum interference and inconvenience and that degradation of the fish is avoided.
4.   Where a landing or transhipment declaration is received by the port Member State from a catching fishing vessel pursuant to Article 8(1) of Regulation (EC) No 1005/2008, the port Member States shall take appropriate measures to verify the accuracy of the information received and shall cooperate with the flag CPC to ensure that landings and/or transhipments are consistent with the amount of catches reported for each catching vessel.
5.   Each port Member State shall submit to the Commission by 15 June of each year the list of fishing vessels that are not flagged to that port Member State and which have landed in its ports tuna and tuna-like species caught in the Area in the preceding calendar year. That information shall be included in the appropriate IOTC report template and shall detail the catch composition by weight and species landed. The Commission shall examine such reports and transmit them to the IOTC Secretariat by 30 June of each year.
