Article 10
Specific permission to operate DLT TSS
1.   A legal person who is authorised as an investment firm, or authorised to operate a regulated market, under Directive 2014/65/EU, or authorised as a CSD under Regulation (EU) No 909/2014, may apply for a specific permission to operate a DLT TSS under this Regulation.
2.   Where a legal person applies for authorisation as an investment firm or for authorisation to operate a regulated market under Directive 2014/65/EU, or as a CSD under Regulation (EU) No 909/2014, and, simultaneously, applies for a specific permission under this Article, for the sole purpose of operating a DLT TSS, the competent authority shall not assess whether the applicant fulfils those requirements of Directive 2014/65/EU or those of Regulation (EU) No 909/2014 in respect of which the applicant has requested an exemption in accordance with Article 6 of this Regulation.
3.   Where, as referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article, a legal person simultaneously applies for authorisation as an investment firm or for authorisation to operate a regulated market, or for authorisation as a CSD, and for a specific permission, it shall submit in its application the information required under Article 7 of Directive 2014/65/EU or Article 17 of Regulation (EU) No 909/2014 respectively, except for information that would be necessary to demonstrate compliance with the requirements in respect of which the applicant has requested an exemption in accordance with Article 6 of this Regulation.
4.   An application for a specific permission to operate a DLT TSS under this Regulation shall contain the following information:
(a)
the applicant’s business plan, the rules of the DLT TSS and any legal terms as referred to in Article 7(1), as well as information regarding the functioning, services and activities of the DLT TSS as referred to in Article 7(3);
(b)
a description of the functioning of the distributed ledger technology used, as referred to in Article 7(2);
(c)
a description of the applicant’s overall IT and cyber arrangements as referred to in Article 7(4);
(d)
evidence that the applicant has in place sufficient prudential safeguards to meet its liabilities and to compensate its clients, as referred to in Article 7(6), third subparagraph;
(e)
where applicable, a description of the safekeeping arrangements for clients’ DLT financial instruments as referred to in Article 7(5);
(f)
a description of the arrangements for ensuring investor protection and a description of the mechanisms for handling client complaints and redress, as referred to in Article 7(6), second subparagraph;
(g)
the applicant’s transition strategy; and
(h)
the exemptions that the applicant is requesting under Article 6, the justification for each exemption requested and any compensatory measures proposed and the means by which it intends to comply with the conditions attached to those exemptions.
5.   In addition to the information referred to in paragraph 4 of this Article, an applicant that intends to operate a DLT TSS as an investment firm or market operator shall submit the information on how it intends to comply with the applicable requirements of Regulation (EU) No 909/2014 as referred to in Article 6(1) of this Regulation, except for information that would be necessary to demonstrate compliance with requirements in respect of which the applicant has requested an exemption in accordance with that Article.
In addition to the information referred to in paragraph 4 of this Article, an applicant that intends to operate a DLT TSS as a CSD shall submit the information on how it intends to comply with the applicable requirements of Directive 2014/65/EU as referred to in Article 6(2) of this Regulation, except for information that would be necessary to demonstrate compliance with requirements in respect of which the applicant has requested an exemption in accordance with that Article.
6.   By 23 March 2023, ESMA shall develop guidelines to establish standard forms, formats and templates for the purposes of paragraph 4.
7.   Within 30 working days of the date of receipt of an application for a specific permission to operate a DLT TSS, the competent authority shall assess whether the application is complete. If the application is not complete, the competent authority shall set a time limit by which the applicant is to provide the missing or any additional information. The competent authority shall inform the applicant when the competent authority considers the application to be complete.
As soon as the competent authority considers the application to be complete, it shall send a copy of that application to:
(a)
ESMA; and
(b)
the relevant authorities specified in Article 12 of Regulation (EU) No 909/2014.
8.   Where necessary to promote the consistency and proportionality of exemptions, or where necessary to ensure investor protection, market integrity and financial stability, ESMA shall provide the competent authority with a non-binding opinion on the exemptions requested or on the adequacy of the type of distributed ledger technology used for the purposes of this Regulation, within 30 calendar days of receiving a copy of that application.
Before issuing a non-binding opinion, ESMA shall consult the competent authorities of the other Member States and shall take the utmost account of their views when issuing its opinion.
Where ESMA issues a non-binding opinion, the competent authority shall give that opinion due consideration and shall provide ESMA with a statement regarding any significant deviations from that opinion if ESMA so requests. ESMA’s opinion and the competent authority’s statement shall not be made public.
The relevant authorities specified in Articles 12 of Regulation (EU) No 909/2014 shall provide the competent authority with a non-binding opinion on the features of the DLT TSS operated by the applicant within 30 calendar days of receiving a copy of that application.
9.   Within 90 working days of the date of receipt of a complete application for a specific permission to operate a DLT TSS, the competent authority shall carry out an assessment of the application and decide whether to grant the specific permission. Where the applicant applies simultaneously for authorisation under Directive 2014/65/EU or under Regulation (EU) No 909/2014 and for a specific permission under this Article, the assessment period may be extended for a further period up to that specified in Article 7(3) of Directive 2014/65/EU or Article 17(8) of Regulation (EU) No 909/2014 respectively.
10.   Without prejudice to Articles 7 and 44 of Directive 2014/65/EU and Article 17 of Regulation (EU) No 909/2014, the competent authority shall refuse to grant a specific permission to operate a DLT TSS if there are grounds for believing that:
(a)
there are significant risks to investor protection, market integrity or financial stability that are not properly addressed and mitigated by the applicant;
(b)
the specific permission to operate a DLT TSS and the exemptions requested are being sought for the purpose of circumventing legal or regulatory requirements; or
(c)
the operator of DLT TSS will not be able to comply, or will not allow its users to comply, with applicable provisions of Union law or provisions of national law falling outside the scope of Union Law.
11.   A specific permission shall be valid throughout the Union for a period of up to six years from the date of issuance. The specific permission shall specify the exemptions that are granted in accordance with Article 6, any compensatory measures and any lower thresholds set by the competent authority in accordance with Article 3(6).
The competent authority shall inform ESMA and the relevant authorities specified in Article 12 of Regulation (EU) No 909/2014 of the grant, refusal, or withdrawal of a specific permission under this Article without delay, including any information specified under the first subparagraph of this paragraph.
ESMA shall publish on its website:
(a)
the list of DLT TSSs, the start and end dates of their specific permissions, the list of exemptions granted to each of them, and any lower thresholds set by competent authorities for each of them; and
(b)
the total number of requests for exemptions that have been made under Article 6, indicating the number and types of exemptions granted or refused, together with the justifications for any refusals.
The information referred to in the third subparagraph, point (b), shall be published on an anonymous basis.
12.   Without prejudice to Articles 8 and 44 of Directive 2014/65/EU and Article 20 of Regulation (EU) No 909/2014, the competent authority shall withdraw a specific permission or any related exemptions where:
(a)
a flaw has been discovered in the functioning of the distributed ledger technology used, or in the services and activities provided by the operator of a DLT TSS that poses a risk to investor protection, market integrity or financial stability, and the risk outweighs the benefits of the services and activities under experimentation;
(b)
the operator of the DLT TSS has breached the conditions attached to the exemptions;
(c)
the operator of the DLT TSS has admitted to trading or recorded financial instruments that do not fulfil the conditions set out in Article 3(1);
(d)
the operator of the DLT TSS has exceeded the threshold referred to in Article 3(2);
(e)
the operator of the DLT TSS has exceeded the threshold referred to in Article 3(3) and has not activated the transition strategy; or
(f)
the operator of the DLT TSS obtained the specific permission or related exemptions on the basis of misleading information or a material omission.
13.   Where an operator of a DLT TSS intends to introduce a material change to the functioning of the distributed ledger technology used, or to the services or activities of that operator, and that material change requires a new specific permission, a new exemption, or the modification of one or more of the operator’s existing exemptions or of any conditions attached to an exemption, the operator of the DLT TSS shall request a new specific permission, exemption or modification.
Where an operator of a DLT TSS requests a new specific permission, exemption or modification, the procedure set out in Article 6 shall apply. That request shall be processed by the competent authority in accordance with this Article.
