Article 8
Missions
1.   Missions shall be programmed within the pillar 'Global Challenges and European Industrial Competitiveness', but may also benefit from actions carried out within other parts of the Programme as well as complementary actions carried out under other Union programmes. Missions shall allow for competing solutions, resulting in pan-European added value and impact.
2.   Missions shall be defined and implemented in accordance with this Regulation and the specific programme, ensuring the active and early involvement of the Member States and extensive exchanges with the European Parliament. The missions, their objectives, budget, targets, scope, indicators and milestones shall be identified in strategic R&I plans or the work programmes as appropriate. Evaluations of proposals under the missions shall be carried out in accordance with Article 29.
3.   During the first three years of the Programme, a maximum of 10 % of the annual budget of Pillar II shall be programmed through specific calls for proposals for implementing the missions. For the remaining years of the Programme that percentage may be increased subject to a positive assessment of the mission selection and of the management process. The Commission shall communicate the total budgetary share of each work programme dedicated to missions.
4.   Missions shall:
(a)
using SDGs as sources for their design and implementation, have a clear R&I content and Union added value, and contribute to reaching Union priorities and commitments and the Programme objectives referred to in Article 3;
(b)
cover areas of common European relevance, be inclusive, encourage broad engagement and active participation from various types of stakeholders from the public and private sector, including citizens and end-users, and deliver R&I results that could benefit all Member States;
(c)
be bold and inspirational, hence have wide, scientific, technological, societal, economic, environmental or policy relevance and impact;
(d)
indicate a clear direction and clear objectives, be targeted, measurable and time-bound and have a clear budgetary envelope;
(e)
be selected in a transparent manner and be centred on ambitious, excellence-based and impact-driven, but realistic goals and on research, development and innovation activities;
(f)
have the necessary scope, scale and mobilisation of the resources and leverage of additional public and private funds required to deliver their outcome;
(g)
stimulate activities across disciplines (including SSH) and encompass activities from a broad range of TRLs, including lower TRLs;
(h)
be open to multiple, bottom-up approaches and solutions which take into account human and societal needs and benefits and recognise the importance of diverse contributions to their achievement;
(i)
benefit from synergies with other Union programmes in a transparent manner as well as with national and, where relevant, regional innovation ecosystems.
5.   The Commission shall monitor and evaluate each mission in accordance with Articles 50 and 52 and Annex V, including progress towards short, medium and long-term targets, covering the implementation, monitoring and phasing-out of the missions. An assessment of the first missions established under the Programme shall take place no later than 2023 and before any decision is taken on creating new missions, or on continuing, terminating or redirecting ongoing missions. The results of that assessment shall be made public and shall include, but not be limited to, an analysis of their selection process and of their governance, budget, focus and progress to date.
