Article 41
Access rights
1.   Requests to exercise access rights and the waiver of access rights shall be in writing.
2.   Unless otherwise agreed with the grantor, access rights shall not include the right to sub-license.
3.   Before acceding to the grant agreement the beneficiaries shall inform each other of any restrictions to granting access to their background.
4.   If a beneficiary is no longer involved in an action, this shall not affect its obligations to grant access.
5.   If a beneficiary defaults on its obligations, the beneficiaries may agree that that beneficiary no longer has access rights.
6.   Beneficiaries shall grant access to:
(a)
their results on a royalty-free basis to any other beneficiary in the action that needs them to implement its own tasks;
(b)
their background to any other beneficiary in the action that needs it to implement its own tasks, subject to any restrictions referred to in paragraph 3; that access shall be granted on a royalty-free basis, unless otherwise agreed by the beneficiaries before their accession to the grant agreement;
(c)
their results and, subject to any restrictions referred to in paragraph 3, to their background to any other beneficiary in the action that needs them to exploit its own results; that access shall be granted under fair and reasonable conditions to be agreed upon.
7.   Unless otherwise agreed by the beneficiaries, they shall also grant access to their results and, subject to any restrictions referred to in paragraph 3, to their background to a legal entity that:
(a)
is established in a Member State or associated country;
(b)
is under the direct or indirect control of another beneficiary, or is under the same direct or indirect control as that beneficiary, or is directly or indirectly controlling that beneficiary; and
(c)
needs the access to exploit the results of that beneficiary, in accordance with the beneficiary's exploitation obligations.
Access shall be granted under fair and reasonable conditions to be agreed upon.
8.   A request for access for exploitation purposes may be made up to one year after the end of the action, unless the beneficiaries agree on a different time limit.
9.   Beneficiaries that have received Union funding shall grant access to their results on a royalty-free basis to the Union institutions, bodies, offices or agencies for developing, implementing and monitoring Union policies or programmes. Access shall be limited to non-commercial and non-competitive use.
Such access rights shall not extend to the beneficiaries' background.
In actions under the cluster 'Civil Security for Society', beneficiaries that have received Union funding shall also grant access to their results on a royalty-free basis to Member States' national authorities, for developing, implementing and monitoring their policies or programmes in that area. Access shall be limited to non-commercial and non-competitive use and shall be subject to a bilateral agreement defining specific conditions aimed at ensuring that those access rights are used only for the intended purpose and that appropriate confidentiality obligations are in place. The requesting Member State, Union institution, body, office or agency shall notify all Member States of such requests.
10.   The work programme may provide, where appropriate, for additional access rights.
