Article 53
Audits
1.   The control system for the Programme shall ensure an appropriate balance between trust and control, taking into account administrative and other costs of controls at all levels, especially for beneficiaries. Audit rules shall be clear, consistent and coherent throughout the Programme.
2.   The audit strategy for the Programme shall be based on the financial audit of a representative sample of expenditure across the Programme as a whole. The representative sample shall be complemented by a selection based on an assessment of the risks related to expenditure. Actions that receive joint funding from different Union programmes shall be audited only once, covering all programmes involved and their respective applicable rules.
3.   In addition, the Commission or the relevant funding body may rely on system and processes audits at beneficiary level. Those audits shall be optional for certain types of beneficiaries and shall examine the systems and processes of a beneficiary, complemented by an audit of transactions. They shall be carried out by a competent independent auditor qualified to carry out statutory audits of accounting documents in accordance with Directive 2006/43/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (34). The system and processes audits may be used by the Commission or the relevant funding body to determine the overall assurance on the sound financial management of expenditure and for reconsideration of the level of ex post audits and certificates on financial statements.
4.   In accordance with Article 127 of the Financial Regulation, the Commission or the relevant funding body may rely on audits on the use of Union contributions carried out by other independent and competent persons or entities, including by other than those mandated by the Union institutions or bodies.
5.   Audits may be carried out up to two years after the payment of the balance.
6.   The Commission shall publish audit guidelines, aiming to ensure the reliable and uniform application and interpretation of the audit procedures and rules throughout the duration of the Programme.
