Article 22
Legal entities eligible for participation
1.   Any legal entity, regardless of its place of establishment and including legal entities from non-associated third countries or international organisations, may participate in actions under the Programme, provided that the conditions laid down in this Regulation have been met together with any conditions laid down in the work programme or call for proposals.
2.   Except in duly justified cases where the work programme otherwise provides, legal entities forming a consortium shall be eligible for participation in actions under the Programme provided that the consortium includes:
(a)
at least one independent legal entity established in a Member State; and
(b)
at least two other independent legal entities each established in different Member States or associated countries;
3.   ERC frontier research actions, EIC actions, training and mobility actions or programme co-fund actions may be implemented by one or more legal entities, provided that one of those legal entities shall be established in a Member State or associated country on the basis of an agreement concluded in accordance with Article 16.
4.   Coordination and support actions may be implemented by one or more legal entities, which may be established in a Member State, associated country or, in exceptional cases, in another third country.
5.   For actions related to Union strategic assets, interests, autonomy or security, the work programme may provide that the participation can be limited to legal entities established only in Member States or to legal entities established in specified associated or other third countries in addition to Member States. Any limitation of the participation of legal entities established in associated countries which are EEA members shall be in accordance with the terms and conditions of the Agreement on the European Economic Area. For duly justified and exceptional reasons, in order to guarantee the protection of the strategic interests of the Union and its Member States, the work programme may also exclude the participation of legal entities established in the Union or in associated countries directly or indirectly controlled by non-associated third countries or by legal entities of non-associated third countries from individual calls for proposals, or make their participation subject to conditions set out in the work programme.
6.   Where appropriate and duly justified, the work programme may provide for eligibility criteria in addition to those set out in paragraphs 2 to 5 to take into account specific policy requirements or the nature and objectives of the action, including the number of legal entities, the type of legal entity and the place of establishment.
7.   For actions benefiting from amounts under Article 15(5), the participation shall be limited to a single legal entity established in the jurisdiction of the delegating managing authority, except if otherwise agreed with that managing authority.
8.   Where indicated in the work programme, the JRC may participate in actions.
9.   The JRC, international European research organisations and legal entities created under Union law shall be deemed to be established in a Member State other than the ones in which other legal entities participating in the action are established.
10.   For ERC frontier research actions, training and mobility actions and when provided for in the work programme, international organisations with headquarters in a Member State or associated country shall be deemed to be established in that Member State or associated country. For other parts of the Programme, international organisations other than international European research organisations shall be deemed to be established in a non-associated third country.
