Article 29
Evaluation
1.   Proposals shall be evaluated by the evaluation committee which shall be composed of independent external experts.
For EIC activities, missions and in duly justified cases as set out in the work programme adopted by the Commission, the evaluation committee may be composed partially or, in the case of coordination and support actions, partially or fully of representatives of Union institutions or bodies as referred to in Article 150 of the Financial Regulation.
The evaluation process may be followed by independent observers.
2.   Where applicable, the evaluation committee shall rank the proposals that have passed the applicable thresholds, according to:
(a)
the evaluation scores;
(b)
their contribution to the achievement of specific policy objectives, including the constitution of a consistent portfolio of projects namely for Pathfinder activities, missions and in other duly justified cases as set out in the work programme adopted by the Commission in detail.
For EIC activities, missions and in other duly justified cases as set out in the work programme adopted by the Commission in detail, the evaluation committee may also propose adjustments to the proposals insofar as those adjustments are needed for the consistency of the portfolio approach. Those adjustments shall be in conformity with the conditions for participation and comply with the principle of equal treatment. The Programme Committee shall be informed of such cases.
3.   The evaluation process shall be designed to avoid conflicts of interest and bias. The transparency of the evaluation criteria and of the proposal scoring method shall be guaranteed.
4.   In accordance with Article 200(7) of the Financial Regulation, applicants shall receive feedback at all stages of the evaluation and, where the proposal is rejected, the reasons for rejection.
5.   Legal entities established in low R&I performing countries who have participated successfully in the component 'widening participation and spreading excellence' shall receive, upon request, a record of their participation, that may accompany proposals to the collaborative parts of the Programme that they coordinate.
