Article 49
Appointment of independent external experts
1.   Independent external experts shall be identified and selected on the basis of calls for expression of interest from individuals and through calls addressed to relevant organisations such as research agencies, research institutions, universities, standardisation organisations, civil society organisations or enterprises with a view to establishing a database of candidates.
By way of derogation from Article 237(3) of the Financial Regulation, the Commission or the relevant funding body may, exceptionally and in duly justified cases, select in a transparent manner any individual expert with the appropriate skills not included in the database provided that a call for expression of interest has not identified suitable independent external experts.
Such experts shall declare their independence and capacity to support the objectives of the Programme.
2.   In accordance with Article 237(2) and (3) of the Financial Regulation, the independent external experts shall be remunerated based on standard conditions. If justified, and in exceptional cases, an appropriate level of remuneration beyond the standard conditions based on relevant market standards, especially for specific high-level experts, may be granted. Such costs shall be covered by the Programme.
3.   In addition to the information referred to in Article 38(2) and (3) of the Financial Regulation, the names of independent external experts evaluating grant applications who are appointed in a personal capacity shall be published, together with their area of expertise, at least once a year on the website of the Commission or of the funding body. Such information shall be collected, processed and published in accordance with Regulation (EU) 2018/1725 of the European Parliament and of the Council (33).
4.   The Commission or the relevant funding body shall take the appropriate measures to prevent conflicts of interest as regards the involvement of independent external experts in accordance with Article 61 and Article 150(5) of the Financial Regulation.
The Commission or the relevant funding body shall ensure that an expert faced with a conflict of interest in relation to a matter on which the expert is required to provide an opinion does not evaluate, advise or assist on the specific matter in question.
5.   When appointing independent external experts, the Commission or the relevant funding body shall take appropriate measures to seek a balanced composition within the expert groups and evaluation panels in terms of skills, experience, knowledge, including in terms of specialisation, in particular on SSH, geographical diversity and gender, taking into account the situation in the field of the action.
6.   Where appropriate, an adequate number of independent external experts shall be ensured for each proposal in order to guarantee the quality of the evaluation.
7.   The information on the level of remuneration of all independent external experts shall be made available to the European Parliament and to the Council.
