Article 39
Exploitation and dissemination
1.   Each beneficiary that has received Union funding shall use its best efforts to exploit the results it owns, or to have them exploited by another legal entity. Exploitation may be direct by the beneficiaries or indirect in particular through the transfer and licensing of results in accordance with Article 40.
The work programme may provide for additional exploitation obligations.
If, despite a beneficiary's best efforts to exploit its results directly or indirectly, the results are not exploited within a given period as established in the grant agreement, the beneficiary shall use an appropriate online platform as identified in the grant agreement to find interested parties to exploit those results. That obligation may be waived at the request of the beneficiary if justified.
2.   Beneficiaries shall disseminate their results as soon as feasible, in a publicly available format, subject to any restrictions due to the protection of intellectual property, security rules or legitimate interests.
The work programme may provide for additional dissemination obligations while safeguarding the Union's economic and scientific interests.
3.   Beneficiaries shall ensure that open access to scientific publications applies under the terms and conditions laid down in the grant agreement. In particular, the beneficiaries shall ensure that they or the authors retain sufficient intellectual property rights to comply with their open access requirements.
Open access to research data shall be the general rule under the terms and conditions laid down in the grant agreement, ensuring the possibility of exceptions following the principle 'as open as possible, as closed as necessary', taking into consideration the legitimate interests of the beneficiaries including commercial exploitation and any other constraints, such as data protection rules, privacy, confidentiality, trade secrets, Union competitive interests, security rules or intellectual property rights.
The work programme may provide for additional incentives or obligations for the purpose of adhering to open science practices.
4.   Beneficiaries shall manage all research data generated in an action under the Programme in line with the FAIR principles and in accordance with the grant agreement and shall establish a Data Management Plan.
The work programme may provide, where justified, for additional obligations to use the EOSC for storing and giving access to research data.
5.   Beneficiaries that intend to disseminate their results shall give advance notice to the other beneficiaries in the action. Any other beneficiary may object if it can show that dissemination of the results would significantly harm its legitimate interests in relation to its results or background. In such cases, the results shall not be disseminated unless appropriate steps are taken to safeguard those legitimate interests.
6.   Unless the work programme provides otherwise, proposals shall include a plan for the exploitation and dissemination of the results. If the expected exploitation of the results entails developing, creating, manufacturing and marketing a product or process, or in creating and providing a service, the plan shall include a strategy for such exploitation. If the plan provides for the exploitation of the results primarily in non-associated third countries, the legal entities shall explain how that exploitation is still to be considered to be in the Union interest.
The beneficiaries shall update the plan for the exploitation and dissemination of the results during and after the end of the action, in accordance with the grant agreement.
7.   For the purposes of monitoring and dissemination by the Commission or the relevant funding body, the beneficiaries shall provide any information requested regarding the exploitation and dissemination of their results, in accordance with the grant agreement. Subject to the legitimate interests of the beneficiaries, such information shall be made publicly available.
