Article 50
Monitoring and reporting
1.   The Commission shall monitor continuously the management and implementation of the Programme, the specific programme referred to in point (a) of Article 1(2) and the activities of the EIT. In order to enhance transparency, data shall also be made publicly available in an accessible manner on the Commission's website according to the latest update. In particular, data for projects funded under ERC, European Partnerships, missions, the EIC and the EIT shall be included in the same database.
The database shall include:
(a)
time-bound indicators to report on an annual basis on the progress of the Programme towards achievement of the objectives referred to in Article 3 and set out in Annex V along impact pathways;
(b)
information on the level of mainstreaming SSH, the ratio between lower and higher TRLs in collaborative research, the progress on the participation of widening countries, the geographical composition of consortia in collaborative projects, the evolution of researchers salaries, the use of a two-stage submission and evaluation procedure, the measures aimed at facilitating collaborative links in European R&I, the use of the evaluation review and the number and types of complaints, the level of climate mainstreaming and related expenditures, SME participation, private sector participation, gender participation in funded actions, evaluation panels, boards and advisory groups, the 'Seals of Excellence', the European Partnerships as well as the co-funding rate, the complementary and cumulative funding from other Union programmes, research infrastructures, time-to-grant, the level of international cooperation, engagement of citizens and civil society participation;
(c)
the levels of expenditure disaggregated at project level in order to allow for specific analysis, including per intervention area;
(d)
the level of oversubscription, in particular the number of proposals and per call for proposals, their average score, the share of proposals above and below quality thresholds.
2.   To ensure the effective assessment of the Programme's progress towards the achievement of its objectives, the Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 55 to amend Annex V with regard to the impact pathway indicators, where considered to be necessary, and to set baselines and targets as well as to supplement this Regulation with provisions on the establishment of a monitoring and evaluation framework.
3.   The performance reporting system shall ensure that data for monitoring the implementation and the results of the Programme are collected efficiently, effectively and in a timely manner, without increasing the administrative burden for beneficiaries. To that end, proportionate reporting requirements shall be imposed on recipients of Union funds, including at the level of researchers involved in the actions in order to be able to track their career and mobility, and where appropriate, on Member States.
4.   Qualitative analysis from the Commission and Union or national funding bodies shall complement as much as possible quantitative data.
5.   The measures aimed at facilitating collaborative links in European R&I shall be monitored and reviewed in the context of the work programmes.
