Article 13
Review and report
1.   In 2010, the Commission shall submit a report to the European Parliament and to the Council reviewing the progress made towards implementation of the Community's integrated approach to reducing CO2 emissions from light-duty vehicles.
2.   By 31 October 2014, and every three years thereafter, measures shall be adopted to amend Annex I to adjust the figure M0, referred to therein, to the average mass of new passenger cars in the previous three calendar years.
Those measures shall take effect for the first time on 1 January 2016 and every three years thereafter.
Those measures, designed to amend non-essential elements of this Regulation, shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 14(3).
3.   From 2012, the Commission shall carry out an impact assessment in order to review by 2014, as provided for in Article 14(3) of Regulation (EC) No 715/2007, the procedures for measuring CO2 emissions as set out under that Regulation. The Commission shall, in particular, make appropriate proposals to adapt those procedures to reflect adequately the real CO2 emissions behaviour of cars and to include the approved innovative technologies as defined in Article 12 that could be reflected in the test cycle. The Commission shall ensure that those procedures are subsequently reviewed on a regular basis.
From the date of application of the revised procedure for the measuring of CO2 emissions, innovative technologies shall no longer be approved under the procedure set out in Article 12.
4.   By 2010, the Commission shall review Directive 2007/46/EC so that each type/variant/version corresponds to a unique set of innovative technologies.
5.   By 1 January 2013, the Commission shall complete a review of the specific emissions targets in Annex I and of the derogations in Article 11, with the aim of defining:
—
the modalities for reaching, by the year 2020, a long-term target of 95 g CO2/km in a cost-effective manner; and
—
the aspects of the implementation of that target, including the excess emissions premium.
On the basis of such a review and its impact assessment, which includes an overall assessment of the impact on the car industry and its dependent industries, the Commission shall, if appropriate, make a proposal to amend this Regulation in a way which is as neutral as possible from the point of view of competition, and which is socially equitable and sustainable.
6.   The Commission shall by 2014, following an impact assessment, publish a report on the availability of data on footprint and its use as a utility parameter for determining specific emissions targets and, if appropriate, submit a proposal to the European Parliament and to the Council to amend Annex I.
7.   Measures shall be adopted to provide for the necessary adaptation to the formulae of Annex I in order to reflect any change in the regulatory test procedure for the measurement of specific CO2 emissions.
Those measures, designed to amend non-essential elements of this Regulation, shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 14(3).
