Article 11
Derogations for certain manufacturers
1.   An application for a derogation from the specific emissions target calculated in accordance with Annex I may be made by a manufacturer which is responsible for fewer than 10 000 new passenger cars registered in the Community per calendar year and:
(a)
is not part of a group of connected manufacturers; or
(b)
is part of a group of connected manufacturers that is responsible in total for fewer than 10 000 new passenger cars registered in the Community per calendar year; or
(c)
is part of a group of connected manufacturers but operates its own production facilities and design centre.
2.   A derogation applied for under paragraph 1 may be granted for a maximum period of five calendar years. An application shall be made to the Commission and shall include:
(a)
the name of, and contact person for, the manufacturer;
(b)
evidence that the manufacturer is eligible for a derogation under paragraph 1;
(c)
details of the passenger cars which it manufactures including the mass and specific emissions of CO2 of those passenger cars; and
(d)
a specific emissions target consistent with its reduction potential, including the economic and technological potential to reduce its specific emissions of CO2 and taking into account the characteristics of the market for the type of car manufactured.
3.   Where the Commission considers that the manufacturer is eligible for a derogation applied for under paragraph 1 and is satisfied that the specific emissions target proposed by the manufacturer is consistent with its reduction potential, including the economic and technological potential to reduce its specific emissions of CO2, and taking into account the characteristics of the market for the type of car manufactured, the Commission shall grant a derogation to the manufacturer. The derogation shall apply from 1 January of the year following the date of granting of the derogation.
4.   An application for a derogation from the specific emissions target calculated in accordance with Annex I may be made by a manufacturer which is responsible, together with all of its connected undertakings, for between 10 000 and 300 000 new passenger cars registered in the Community per calendar year.
Such application may be made by a manufacturer in respect of itself or in respect of itself together with any of its connected undertakings. An application shall be made to the Commission and shall include:
(a)
all of the information referred to in paragraphs 2(a) and (c) including, where relevant, information about any connected undertakings.
(b)
a target which is a 25 % reduction on the average specific emissions of CO2 in 2007 or, where a single application is made in respect of a number of connected undertakings, a 25 % reduction on the average of those undertakings' average specific emissions of CO2 in 2007.
Where information on a manufacturer's average specific emissions of CO2 does not exist for the year 2007, the Commission shall determine an equivalent reduction target based upon the best available CO2 emissions reduction technologies deployed in passenger cars of comparable mass and taking into account the characteristics of the market for the type of car manufactured. This target shall be used by the applicant for the purposes of point (b).
The Commission shall grant a derogation to the manufacturer where it is demonstrated that the criteria for the derogation referred to in this paragraph have been met.
5.   A manufacturer which is subject to a derogation in accordance with this Article shall notify the Commission immediately of any change which affects or may affect its eligibility for a derogation.
6.   Where the Commission considers, whether on the basis of a notification under paragraph 5 or otherwise, that a manufacturer is no longer eligible for the derogation, it shall revoke the derogation with effect from 1 January of the next calendar year and shall notify the manufacturer thereof.
7.   Where the manufacturer does not attain its specific emissions target, the Commission shall impose the excess emissions premium on the manufacturer, as set out in Article 9.
8.   The Commission may adopt detailed provisions for the implementation of paragraphs 1 to 7, inter alia, on the interpretation of the eligibility criteria for derogations, on the content of applications, and on the content and assessment of programmes for the reduction of specific emissions of CO2.
Those measures, designed to amend non-essential elements of this Regulation, by supplementing it, shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 14(3).
9.   Applications for a derogation, including the information supporting it, notifications under paragraph 5, revocations under paragraph 6 and any imposition of an excess emissions premium under paragraph 7 and measures adopted pursuant to paragraph 8, shall be made publicly available, subject to Regulation (EC) No 1049/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 May 2001 regarding public access to European Parliament, Council and Commission documents (12).
