Article 5
Access to administrative records and provision of information
1.   In accordance with Article 17a of Regulation (EC) No 223/2009, the NSAs and the Commission (Eurostat) shall have the right to access and use, promptly and free of charge, all administrative records and to integrate those records with other data sources to meet the statistical requirements under this Regulation and update the national statistical business registers and the EuroGroups Register. Access to those records by the NSAs and the Commission (Eurostat) shall be limited to administrative records within their own respective public administrative systems.
2.   Without prejudice to paragraph 1, the tax authorities in each Member State shall provide the competent NSAs with information for statistical purposes related to exports and imports of goods as specified in Annex V.
The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 22 in order to:
(a)
amend Annex V by defining the types of statistical information to be provided by the tax authorities; and
(b)
supplement this Regulation by further specifying the details for the statistical information to be provided by the tax authorities in accordance with Annex V.
3.   Without prejudice to paragraph 1, the customs authority in each Member State shall provide the competent NSAs with information for statistical purposes related to exports and imports of goods as specified in Annex VI.
The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 22 in order to:
(a)
amend Annex VI by defining the types of statistical information to be provided by the customs authorities; and
(b)
supplement this Regulation by further specifying the details for the statistical information to be provided by the customs authorities in accordance with Annex VI.
4.   In order to produce harmonised statistics on international trade in goods and to improve the quality of those statistics, the NSAs of the Member States concerned shall exchange microdata for statistical purposes received from their customs authorities related to exports and imports of goods, for the estimation of quasi-transit exports and imports of their Member State.
For other trade flows that involve the customs authorities of more than one Member State, the NSAs shall exchange the corresponding microdata related to the exports or imports of goods to improve the quality of the statistics concerned.
5.   The Commission may adopt implementing acts specifying the arrangements for the data exchanges in accordance with this Article.
Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 23(2).
