Article 19
Recognition of certificates
1.   Seafarers who do not possess the certificates referred to in Article 4 may be allowed to serve on ships flying the flag of a Member State, provided that a decision on the recognition of their appropriate certificates has been adopted through the procedure set out in paragraphs 2 to 6 of this Article.
2.   A Member State which intends to recognise, by endorsement, appropriate certificates issued by a third country to a master, officer or radio operator, for service on ships flying its flag, shall submit a request for recognition of that third country to the Commission, stating its reasons.
The Commission, assisted by the European Maritime Safety Agency and with the possible involvement of any Member State concerned, shall collect the information referred to in Annex II and shall carry out an assessment of the training and certification systems in the third country for which the request for recognition was submitted, in order to verify whether the country concerned meets all the requirements of the STCW Convention and whether the appropriate measures have been taken to prevent fraud involving certificates.
3.   The decision on the recognition of a third country shall be taken by the Commission in accordance with the regulatory procedure referred to in Article 28(2), within three months from the date of the request for recognition.
If granted, the recognition shall be valid subject to the provisions of Article 20.
If no decision is taken on recognition of the third country concerned within the period laid down in the first subparagraph, the Member State submitting the request may decide to recognise the third country unilaterally until a decision is taken in accordance with the regulatory procedure referred to in Article 28(2).
4.   A Member State may decide, with respect to ships flying its flag, to endorse certificates issued by the third countries recognised by the Commission, account being taken of the provisions contained in Annex II, points (4) and (5).
5.   Recognitions of certificates issued by recognised third countries and published in the Official Journal of the European Union, C series, before 14 June 2005 shall remain valid.
These recognitions may be used by all Member States unless the Commission has subsequently withdrawn them pursuant to Article 20.
6.   The Commission shall draw up and update a list of the third countries that have been recognised. The list shall be published in the Official Journal of the European Union, C series.
7.   Notwithstanding Article 5(6), a Member State may, if circumstances require, allow a seafarer to serve in a capacity other than radio officer or radio operator, except as provided by the Radio Regulations, for a period not exceeding three months on board a ship flying its flag, while holding an appropriate and valid certificate issued and endorsed as required by a third country, but not yet endorsed for recognition by the Member State concerned so as to render it appropriate for service on board a ship flying its flag.
Documentary proof shall be kept readily available that application for an endorsement has been submitted to the competent authorities.
