Article 5
Certificates and endorsements
1.   Certificates shall be issued in accordance with Article 11.
2.   Certificates for masters, officers and radio operators shall be endorsed by the Member State as prescribed in this Article.
3.   Certificates shall be issued in accordance with Regulation I/2, paragraph 1, of the STCW Convention.
4.   In respect of radio operators, Member States may:
(a)
include the additional knowledge required by the relevant regulations in the examination for the issue of a certificate complying with the Radio Regulations; or
(b)
issue a separate certificate indicating that the holder has the additional knowledge required by the relevant regulations.
5.   At the discretion of a Member State endorsements may be incorporated in the format of the certificates being issued as provided for in section A-I/2 of the STCW Code. If so incorporated the form used shall be that set out in section A-I/2, paragraph 1. If issued otherwise, the form of endorsements used shall be that set out in paragraph 2 of that section. Endorsements shall be issued in accordance with Article VI, paragraph 2, of the STCW Convention.
6.   A Member State which recognises a certificate under the procedure laid down in Article 19(2) shall endorse that certificate to attest its recognition. The form of the endorsement used shall be that set out in paragraph 3 of section A-I/2 of the STCW Code.
7.   The endorsements referred to in paragraphs 5 and 6:
(a)
may be issued as separate documents;
(b)
shall each be assigned a unique number, other than endorsements attesting the issue of a certificate which may be assigned the same number as the certificate concerned, provided that that number is unique; and
(c)
shall each expire as soon as the certificate endorsed expires or is withdrawn, suspended or cancelled by the Member State or third country which issued them and, in any case, within five years of their date of issue.
8.   The capacity in which the holder of a certificate is authorised to serve shall be identified in the form of endorsement in terms identical to those used in the applicable safe-manning requirements of the Member State concerned.
9.   A Member State may use a format different from the format laid down in section A-I/2 of the STCW Code, provided that, as a minimum, the required information is provided in Roman characters and Arabic figures, taking account of the variations permitted under section A-I/2.
10.   Subject to Article 19(7) any certificate required by this Directive shall be kept available in its original form on board the ship on which the holder is serving.
