Article 20
Non-compliance with the requirements of the STCW Convention
1.   Notwithstanding the criteria specified in Annex II, when a Member State considers that a recognised third country no longer complies with the requirements of the STCW Convention, it shall notify the Commission immediately, giving substantiated reasons therefor.
The Commission shall without delay refer the matter to the Committee referred to in Article 28(1).
2.   Notwithstanding the criteria set out in Annex II, when the Commission considers that a recognised third country no longer complies with the requirements of the STCW Convention, it shall notify the Member States immediately, giving substantiated reasons therefor.
The Commission shall without delay refer the matter to the Committee referred to in Article 28(1).
3.   When a Member State intends to withdraw the endorsements of all certificates issued by a third country it shall without delay inform the Commission and the other Member States of its intention, giving substantiated reasons therefor.
4.   The Commission, assisted by the European Maritime Safety Agency, shall reassess the recognition of the third country concerned in order to verify whether that country failed to comply with the requirements of the STCW Convention.
5.   Where there are indications that a particular maritime training establishment no longer complies with the requirements of the STCW Convention, the Commission shall notify the country concerned that recognition of that country’s certificates will be withdrawn in two months’ time unless measures are taken to ensure compliance with all the requirements of the STCW Convention.
6.   The decision on the withdrawal of the recognition shall be taken in accordance with the regulatory procedure referred to in Article 28(2), within two months from the date of the communication made by the Member State.
The Member States concerned shall take appropriate measures to implement the decision.
7.   Endorsements attesting recognition of certificates, issued in accordance with Article 5(6) before the date on which the decision to withdraw recognition of the third country is taken, shall remain valid. Seafarers holding such endorsements may not claim an endorsement recognising a higher qualification, however, unless that upgrading is based solely on additional seagoing service experience.
