Article 2
Scope
1.   This Regulation shall apply to all rail journeys and services throughout the Community provided by one or more railway undertakings licensed in accordance with Council Directive 95/18/EC of 19 June 1995 on the licensing of railway undertakings (8).
2.   This Regulation does not apply to railway undertakings and transport services which are not licensed under Directive 95/18/EC.
3.   On the entry into force of this Regulation, Articles 9, 11, 12, 19, 20(1) and 26 shall apply to all rail passenger services throughout the Community.
4.   With the exception of the provisions set out in paragraph 3, a Member State may, on a transparent and non-discriminatory basis, grant an exemption for a period no longer than five years, which may be renewed twice for a maximum period of five years on each occasion, from the application of the provisions of this Regulation to domestic rail passenger services.
5.   With the exception of the provisions set out in paragraph 3 of this Article, a Member State may exempt from the application of the provisions of this Regulation urban, suburban and regional rail passenger services. In order to distinguish between urban, suburban and regional rail passenger services, Member States shall apply the definitions contained in Council Directive 91/440/EEC of 29 July 1991 on the development of the Community’s railways (9). In applying these definitions, Member States shall take into account the following criteria: distance, frequency of services, number of scheduled stops, rolling stock employed, ticketing schemes, fluctuations in passenger numbers between services in peak and off-peak periods, train codes and timetables.
6.   For a maximum period of five years, a Member State may, on a transparent and non-discriminatory basis, grant an exemption, which may be renewed, from the application of the provisions of this Regulation to particular services or journeys because a significant part of the rail passenger service, including at least one scheduled station stop, is operated outside the Community.
7.   Member States shall inform the Commission of exemptions granted pursuant to paragraphs 4, 5 and 6. The Commission shall take appropriate action if such an exemption is deemed not to be in accordance with the provisions of this Article. No later than 3 December 2014, the Commission shall submit to the European Parliament and the Council a report on exemptions granted pursuant to paragraphs 4, 5 and 6.
